Shift to a Learning Stance - The “What Happened?” Conversation

Chapter 2 - Stop Arguing About Who’s Right: Explore Each Other’s Stories
Chapter 3 - Don’t Assume They Meant It: Disentangle Intent from Impact
Chapter 4 - Abandon Blame: Map the Contribution System

The Feelings Conversation

Chapter 5 - Have Your Feelings (Or They Will Have You)

The Identity Conversation

Chapter 6 - Ground Your Identity: Ask Yourself What’s at Stake

Create a Learning Conversation

Chapter 7 - What’s Your Purpose? When to Raise It and When to Let Go
Chapter 8 - Getting Started: Begin from the Third Story
Chapter 9 - Learning: Listen from the Inside Out
Chapter 10 - Expression: Speak for Yourself with Clarity and Power
Chapter 11 - Problem-Solving: Take the Lead
Chapter 12 - Putting It All Together

Ten Questions People Ask About Difficult Conversations
Notes on Some Relevant Organizations




<h4>Introduction</h4>
 
% A Difficult Conversation Is Anything You Find It Hard to Talk About.

% The Dilemma: Avoid or Confront, It Seems There Is No Good Path

% There Is No Such Thing as a Diplomatic Hand Grenade. Delivering a difficult message is like throwing a hand grenade.

% The Rewards Are Worth the Effort. Changing how you deal with difficult conversations takes work.

% Difficult Conversations Are a Normal Part of Life

<h4>The Problem
Chapter 1 - Sort Out the Three Conversations </h4>

Decoding the Structure of Difficult Conversations
  - There’s More Here Than Meets the Ear
  
<b>Each Difficult Conversation Is Really Three Conversations </b>

In studying hundreds of conversations of every kind we have discovered
that there is an underlying structure to what’s going on, and understanding
this structure, in itself, is a powerful first step in improving how we deal
with these conversations. It turns out that no matter what the subject, our
thoughts and feelings fall into the same three categories, or “conversations.”
And in each of these conversations we make predictable errors that distort
our thoughts and feelings, and get us into trouble.
Everything problematic that people say in a difficult conversation, think, and feel falls
into one of these three “conversations.” 

<b>1. The “What Happened?” Conversation. </b>

Most difficult conversations involve disagreement about what has happened or what should happen.
Who said what and who did what? Who’s right, who meant what, and who’s
to blame? People tussle over these issues, both out loud and internally. 

<b>2. The Feelings Conversation. </b>

Every difficult conversation also asks
and answers questions about feelings. Are my feelings valid? Appropriate?
Should I acknowledge or deny them, put them on the table or check them at
the door? What do I do about the other person’s feelings? What if they are
angry or hurt? For example, statement “This is the thanks I get?!” signals hurt and anger, and “I’m under
tremendous pressure” reveals anxiety. These feelings are not addressed
directly in the conversation, but they leak in anyway.

<b>3. The Identity Conversation. </b>

This is the conversation we each have with ourselves about what this situation means to us. We conduct an
internal debate over whether this means we are competent or incompetent, a
good person or bad, worthy of love or unlovable. What impact might it have
on our self-image and self-esteem, our future and our well-being? Our
answers to these questions determine in large part whether we feel
“balanced” during the conversation, or whether we feel off-center and
anxious. 

Every difficult conversation involves grappling with these Three
Conversations, so engaging successfully requires learning to operate
effectively in each of the three realms. Managing all three simultaneously
may seem hard, but it’s easier than facing the consequences of engaging in
difficult conversations blindly.


<b>What We Can’t Change, and What We Can </b>

No matter how skilled we become, there are certain challenges in each of
the Three Conversations that we can’t change. We will still run into
situations where untangling “what happened” is more complicated than we
initially suspect. We will each have information the other person is unaware
of, and raising each other’s awareness is not easy. And we will still face
emotionally charged situations that feel threatening because they put
important aspects of our identity at risk.
What we can change is the way we respond to each of these challenges.
Typically, instead of exploring what information the other person might
have that we don’t, we assume we know all we need to know to understand
and explain things. Instead of working to manage our feelings
constructively, we either try to hide them or let loose in ways that we later
regret. Instead of exploring the identity issues that may be deeply at stake
for us (or them), we proceed with the conversation as if it says nothing
about us – and never come to grips with what is at the heart of our anxiety.
By understanding these errors and the havoc they wreak, we can begin to
craft better approaches. Let’s explore each conversation in more depth.

<h4>The “What Happened?” Conversation: What’s the Story Here? </h4>

<b>The Truth Assumption </b>

As we argue vociferously for our view, we often fail to question one crucial
assumption upon which our whole stance in the conversation is built: I am
right, you are wrong. This simple assumption causes endless grief.
What am I right about? I am right that you drive too fast. I am right that
you are unable to mentor younger colleagues. I am right that your
comments at Thanksgiving were inappropriate. I am right that the patient
should have received more medication after such a painful operation. I am
right that the contractor overcharged me. I am right that I deserve a raise. I
am right that the brochure is fine as it is. The number of things I am right
about would fill a book.
There’s only one hitch: I am not right.
How could this be so? It seems impossible. Surely I must be right
sometimes!
Well, no. The point is this: difficult conversations are almost never about
getting the facts right. They are about conflicting perceptions,
interpretations, and values. They are not about what a contract states, they
are about what a contract means. They are not about which child-rearing
book is most popular, they are about which child-rearing book we should
follow.
They are not about what is true, they are about what is important.


<b>The Intention Invention </b>

The second argument in the “What Happened?” Conversation is over
intentions – yours and mine. Did you yell at me to hurt my feelings or
merely to emphasize your point? Did you throw my cigarettes out because
you’re trying to control my behavior or because you want to help me live
up to my commitment to quit? What I think about your intentions will affect
how I think about you and, ultimately, how our conversation goes.
The error we make in the realm of intentions is simple but profound : we
assume we know the intentions of others when we don’t. Worse still, when
we are unsure about someone’s intentions, we too often decide they are bad.
The truth is, intentions are invisible. We assume them from other
people’s behavior. In other words, we make them up, we invent them. But
our invented stories about other people’s intentions are accurate much less
often than we think. Why? Because people’s intentions, like so much else in
difficult conversations, are complex. Sometimes people act with mixed
intentions. Sometimes they act with no intention, or at least none related to
us. And sometimes they act on good intentions that nonetheless hurt us.
Because our view of others’ intentions (and their views of ours) are so
important in difficult conversations, leaping to unfounded assumptions can
be a disaster.

<b>The Blame Frame </b>

The third error we make in the “What Happened?” Conversation has to do
with blame. Most difficult conversations focus significant attention on
who’s to blame for the mess we’re in. When the company loses its biggest
client, for example, we know that there will shortly ensue a ruthless game
of blame roulette. We don’t care where the ball lands, as long as it doesn’t
land on us. Personal relationships are no different. Your relationship with
your stepmother is strained? She’s to blame. She should stop bugging you
about your messy room and the kids you hang out with.

Talking about fault is similar to talking about truth — it produces
disagreement, denial, and little learning. It evokes fears of punishment and
insists on an either/or answer. Nobody wants to be blamed, especially
unfairly, so our energy goes into defending ourselves.

<h4>The Feelings Conversation: What Should We Do with Our Emotions? </h4>

Difficult conversations are not just about what happened; they also involve
emotion. The question is not whether strong feelings will arise, but how to
handle them when they do. Should you tell your boss how you really feel
about his management style, or about the colleague who stole your idea?
Should you share with your sister how hurt you feel that she stayed friends
with your ex? And what should you do with the anger you are likely to
experience if you decide to talk with that vendor about his sexist remarks?
In the presence of strong feelings, many of us work hard to stay rational.
Getting too deep into feelings is messy, clouds good judgment, and in some
contexts — for example, at work — can seem just plain inappropriate.
Bringing up feelings can also be scary or uncomfortable, and can make us
feel vulnerable. After all, what if the other person dismisses our feelings or
responds without real understanding? Or takes our feelings to heart in a way
that wounds them or irrevocably damages the relationship? And once we’ve
gotten our feelings off our chest, it’s their turn. Are we up to hearing all
about their anger and pain?

<b>An Opera Without Music </b>

The problem with this reasoning is that it fails to take account of one simple
fact: difficult conversations do not just involve feelings, they are at their
very core about feelings. Feelings are not some noisy byproduct of
engaging in difficult talk, they are an integral part of the conflict. Engaging
in a difficult conversation without talking about feelings is like staging an
opera without the music. You’ll get the plot but miss the point.

Consider some of your own difficult conversations. What feelings are
involved? Hurt or anger? Disappointment, shame, confusion? Do you feel
treated unfairly or without respect? For some of us, even saying “I love you” or “I’m proud of you” can feel risky.

In the short term, engaging in a difficult conversation without talking
about feelings may save you time and reduce your anxiety. It may also seem
like a way to avoid certain serious risks – to you, to others, and to the
relationship. But the question remains: if feelings are the issue, what have
you accomplished if you don’t address them?
Understanding feelings, talking about feelings, managing feelings – these
are among the greatest challenges of being human. There is nothing that
will make dealing with feelings easy and risk-free. Most of us, however, can
do a better job in the Feelings Conversation than we are now. It may not
seem like it, but talking about feelings is a skill that can be learned.

