Giant Software Wars: IBM vs. Fujitsu
I had often spoken to large audiences, but I had never addressed a press
conference in a ballroom with a live feed to Japan. Nor had I ever helped
resolve a dispute with so much at stake. It was September 15, 1987, and I
was standing with my co-arbitrator, Jack Jones, on a stage in the Villard
Ballroom at the Helmsley Palace Hotel in New York City, about to
announce a major turning point in the legal war between IBM and Fujitsu.
IBM was the biggest computer company in the world, Fujitsu was its
biggest competitor, and their dispute dealt with software that was essential
to both of them. The parties still despised each other—that hadn’t changed.
Jack often joked that they couldn’t agree on anything, even the color of a
stoplight. The news was that Jack and I, with the help of the parties, had
found a creative solution.
But our story was complicated, involving arcane computer tech-nology,
an undeveloped area of law, and a solution that had never been tried before.
The core issue was whether Fujitsu had illegally copied IBM’s operating
system software.1 This was back in the days of mainframe computers—
gigantic machines used by banks, insurance companies, and other large
institutions. IBM had long dominated this market, but Fujitsu had made
inroads by selling computers that were “IBM-compatible”—that is, capable
of running applications originally written for an IBM. The problem, from
IBM’s point of view, was that Fujitsu had not created its own operating
system from scratch. It had copied IBM’s programming materials.
In the view of IBM and its proud engineers, this was stealing—hitching a
free ride on decades of hard work and financial investment. But to what
extent did copyright law protect IBM’s software? The law wasn’t clear.In 1983 these two rivals had themselves negotiated a settlement, but
within a year it had broken down, destroying any hope of coopera-tion.
They were like two spouses in a bitter divorce whose settlement had fallen
apart. When IBM discovered that Fujitsu was still poaching, or so it
believed, the top brass at IBM exploded. “This time, when we caught
Fujitsu copying, our cup boiled over,” recalls Dan Evangelista, former
general counsel of IBM. “We assumed that they would behave honorably.
From then on, we didn’t trust anything they said or did.”2
Fujitsu, believing it had honored the agreement, was equally enraged by
what it viewed as IBM’s disrespectful claims and arrogant demands.
Takuma Yamamoto, the CEO of Fujitsu, had been a pilot during World War
II and had been assigned to go on a suicide mission just before the Japanese
surrendered. He had seen himself as a guardian of Japan’s honor during the
war and had transferred these feelings to Fujitsu. Yamamoto had put his
trust in IBM in reaching the prior settlement. When IBM refused to work
things out in what he understood as a civil manner, he felt Fujitsu had been
betrayed. “A betrayal is the worst thing in life,” another Fujitsu executive
explained to me recently. Fujitsu “could never trust IBM again. IBM was
not simply a competitor, it was an enemy.”3
Jack and I were determined to keep this mutual demonization under strict
control during the press conference. As a result, we had orchestrated it
down to the smallest detail. There would not be one moment of spontaneity
in it.
As we gazed out over the ballroom, we saw grim-faced executives from
both sides sitting in stony silence. For their own good, we had put them
under a gag order. Left to their own devices, each side would spin the story
not simply as a “win” for themselves but as a big loss for their rival. That
wouldn’t be accurate: our solution would protect the interests of both firms,
not to mention their customers, who needed to know that their business
would not be disrupted because these two giants were brawling over the
scope of intellectual property law. Therefore, Jack and I would be the only
ones speaking at the press conference.
We had hired Burson-Marsteller, one of the biggest public relations firms
in the world, to help us hone the message. Because of the significance of
the story in Japan, we had arranged to have the event beamed live bysatellite to Tokyo (the first such telecast in history) so the news could be
reported simultaneously in both countries. We had taken out full-page ads in
the Wall Street Journal, the New York Times, and Japan’s leading
newspapers, summarizing our decision in our own words so there could be
no question about what we were saying. Finally, Jack and I had spent the
last three days being drilled by a team of media coaches until our
presentation was as sharp as we could make it. (I was not a natural. My
coaches kept telling me not to be so professorial. Or perhaps the word was
didactic.)
We opened the press conference and explained the key points. We had
created a framework—and just a framework, we emphasized—for resolving
all past and future disputes between these two companies. With regard to
past disputes, we would order Fujitsu to pay IBM a single lump sum—in
effect, a “coerced license”—for its previous use of IBM programming
materials. In return, Fujitsu and its customers could continue to use all of
Fujitsu’s existing software without fear of legal challenges. Going forward,
we would establish a set of standards, accompanied by strict and elaborate
safeguards, that would define precisely what Fujitsu could do with IBM
materials in the future—and the price Fujitsu would pay for it. (We had not
yet determined the total dollar amounts, but IBM would collect nearly $1
billion between 1983 and 1995.)
The beauty of this regimen, we thought, was that it would liberate the
parties from the realm of ordinary intellectual property law, which wasn’t
developed enough to be of much use to them in this conflict. Instead, it
empowered Jones and Mnookin to create private law that would apply only
to the relationship between IBM and Fujitsu. And we would not leave them
unsupervised to get into further trouble. We would retain jurisdiction for
another decade and resolve all future software disputes between them.
There would be no appeal. If we did our job well—and much remained to
be done to flesh out and implement our framework—these two giants would
compete in the marketplace, not the courtroom.
We answered reporters’ questions for about an hour and gave individual
interviews to CNN and other stations. All three U.S. networks reported the
story that evening, and the next day it would be front-page news around the
world. When the last reporter had left, Jack and I retired to the hotel bar and
enjoyed a few rounds of drinks. We looked at each other with amusementand a certain amount of disbelief. Jack clinked my glass and grinned: “Who
would have thought a farm boy from Iowa and a Jewish kid from Kansas
City would end up doing something like this?”
Jack’s question was a good one. How did we come to be responsible for
solving this enormously complicated problem?
In my case, it was a fluke. In the late spring of 1985, as I was sitting in
my office at Stanford Law School, I got a call from Dave Nelson, a senior
partner at Morrison & Foerster, a large law firm based in San Francisco. At
the time I was a forty-three-year-old professor.
I knew Dave Nelson but not well. I hadn’t seen or spoken to him in five
years, not since I’d left the law faculty at the University of California at
Berkeley to join the faculty at Stanford. (When I lived in Berkeley, we had
both served on the board of the private school my daughters attended.)
Nelson said that he was representing a client involved in a major software
dispute with another large company, and it looked like the conflict was
headed for arbitration. He couldn’t disclose the name of either party, but
soon his client would have to nominate someone to serve as its designated
arbitrator on a three-person panel. Nelson had thought of me because he had
recently read an article of mine in the California Bar Journal.
Life takes strange turns. The short article that had reminded Nelson of
my existence was so trivial that I hadn’t even bothered to put it on my
résumé. Titled “Spreading the Word about Spreadsheet Software,”4 the
article explained how electronic spreadsheets could be useful in a variety of
legal contexts. At most, the article showed that I was an early adopter and
reasonably sophisticated user of spreadsheet software (which was unusual
for a lawyer in those days).
I told Nelson I had no expertise in software programming and only a
little experience as a mediator or arbitrator. The field of “alternative dispute
resolution” (ADR) was still in its infancy and I was hardly a big name in it.
Nelson brushed aside these disclaimers and invited me to San Francisco
to talk with his partner Bob Raven, who would handle the case if arbitration
proved necessary. I accepted the invitation. I was curious. Who was this
secret client? What was the fight all about?The next week I drove to San Francisco for my first meeting with Raven,
one of the brightest stars in California’s legal galaxy. He was then about
sixty years old, a physically imposing man of at least six-foot-three with a
full head of gray hair. With his rugged features and confident air, Raven
looked as if he would be just as happy wearing jeans and riding a horse as
wearing a suit and tie and sitting in a conference room. (I later learned he
owned a ranch.) He was an easy man to like, exuding an appealing
combination of energy, strength, and warmth. But behind his charm was a
fiercely competitive and ambitious temperament, which I would also come
to appreciate.
Raven asked about my background and seemed particularly glad to hear
that I had studied economics and taught antitrust law. (I would later learn
why.) But when he asked about my knowledge of computer programming
and intellectual property law, I trotted out my disclaimers again. I told him
that if he wanted a real expert in these fields, he should talk to two of my
Stanford colleagues who were far more qualified.
I enjoyed the interview and left persuaded that nothing more would come
of it.
To my surprise, about two weeks later Nelson called again and asked me
to come back to San Francisco. It was at this second meeting that I finally
learned the identity of the client, Fujitsu, and its opponent, IBM. (Given
IBM’s dominance, I suddenly understood why Raven had been so interested
in my background in antitrust.) Raven told me only the bare bones of the
dispute—that it involved operating system software for mainframe
computers—because if I were appointed as an arbitrator I would be serving
a quasi-judicial role. But he did tell me that IBM would be represented by
Tom Barr of Cravath, Swaine & Moore.
When I heard Barr’s name, I realized that the stakes in this conflict had
to be enormous. In terms of big-case commercial litigation, Tom Barr was a
five-star general. He had successfully defended IBM in a massive antitrust
suit brought by the U.S. government and scores of private plaintiffs. By
enlisting Barr in this fight with Fujitsu, IBM was signaling to the world that
it would spend whatever it took to prevail.
After confirming that I had had no conflicts of interest in the case, Raven
popped the question: Was I interested enough to go to Japan and let the
client look me over? He would send Mike Jacobs, a young associate, tokeep me company. (I was amused. Did I need a chaperone? It was the first
sign that Fujitsu, too, was sparing no expense.) Perhaps I could give an
academic talk of some sort to Fujitsu employees, but that wasn’t critical.
The point was that the company’s senior executives wanted to meet me in
the flesh before they nominated me.
I asked for a couple of days to think it over. Raven had said the case
would take about half my time for the next eighteen months—little did we
know how off the mark that guess would turn out to be—and that I’d be
well compensated for my time. I thought it all sounded extremely
interesting, but I worried that the whole exercise might be a distraction from
my academic career. Fortunately, my Stanford buddy Ron Gilson stepped in
and told me I’d be crazy not to do it. This assignment would put me in the
middle of an important high-tech dispute between two giant companies
represented by superb lawyers. I would learn a great deal about dispute
resolution, an emerging interest of mine. “Stanford is in the middle of
Silicon Valley. You have tenure,” Gilson urged me. “The dean would surely
grant you half-time leave. Do it!”
So I said yes. Mike Jacobs and I flew to Japan. We spent a day visiting
Fujitsu’s executive headquarters in Tokyo, a large, modern office tower
overlooking the Imperial Garden. I was given a tour of several museum-like
rooms that traced the company’s phenomenal growth. In 1949, it had been
an obscure company that made telephone switching equipment and had
about 2,300 employees. (That was the year that Takuma Yamamoto, the
company’s future CEO, graduated from Tokyo Uni-versity and was steered
to Fujitsu by a professor. As Yamamoto later confessed in his memoir, he
was “totally crushed” when the professor placed him at Fujitsu because
Yamamoto had “never even heard” of the tiny company.5) By the time of
my visit in 1985, Fujitsu was Japan’s largest computer company, with
annual revenues in the billions of dollars.
As requested, I gave a thirty-minute talk in English to some software
engineers and mid-level managers. It was a bit of a farce. Although Yuri
Morita (then a young manager) ably served as translator, the engineers had
no clue what I was talking about, or even why I was there. Those who
managed to stay awake were impeccably polite. The real point of the trip
was for the top executives to meet me in person. I remember having a ratherelegant lunch in an executive dining room and being introduced to a
number of distinguished-looking, extremely polite men, none of whom had
attended my lecture. (Morita again served as translator.) I learned that all
had spent their entire careers at Fujitsu and were extremely proud of the
company’s growth.
The man who made the strongest impression on me was Michio Naruto.
Voluble and self-confident, younger than the other top executives, he was a
member of the Fujitsu board and in charge of international operations. I
would later learn that this charming and outgoing man was independently
wealthy (his family owned vast forestlands in Japan) and had a passion for
golf. Naruto traveled the world and played whenever he could. He owned at
least three matched sets of clubs and kept one in California, another on the
East Coast, and a third in Europe so he could play during his travels. He
said nothing to me about Fujitsu’s conflict with IBM except to underscore
the arbitration’s extreme importance. I responded that if I were appointed, I
would work very hard to resolve this conflict.
About a week after my return to the United States, Nelson called to tell
me that the trip had gone well. Fujitsu wanted to nominate me as an
arbitrator. I was pleased but puzzled by Fujitsu’s decision-making process.
What had Fujitsu learned of importance about me during my visit? Nelson
later told me that I was hired because Naruto liked my face.
I first met my co-arbitrator, Jack Jones, in the lobby of the Ritz hotel in
London. We had flown there as part of a large entourage, including Raven
of Morrison & Foerster and Tom Barr of Cravath, to interview candidates
for the position of chair of the arbitration panel. The parties’ earlier
settlement required them to resolve disputes by arbitration—a common
commercial practice. Substantial international arbitrations are typically
resolved by a panel of three arbitrators, one chosen by each party and a
third who acts as chair. Fujitsu had chosen me, IBM had chosen Jack, and
now our group had to complete the panel by selecting the third arbitrator.6
Why London? Because Fujitsu had refused to accept an American
chairperson and IBM had refused to accept one who was Japanese. Because
the proceedings were going to be in English, the parties had decided to
focus our search in the United Kingdom and Canada.The night before our first interviews, Jack and I met in the bar to get
acquainted over a couple of drinks. He was not a lawyer and had never been
involved in an arbitration case, but he knew a lot about computers and had
served as a witness for IBM in the antitrust suit brought by the U.S.
government. As the executive vice president of the Norfolk Southern
Corporation, he was in charge of purchasing millions of dollars’ worth of
computer equipment. He bought a lot of IBM machines, but he bought from
many other companies as well. He personally used an Apple computer,
which he adored.
As he talked, I remember thinking, “This guy would be a hell of a
witness.” He was an impressive-looking man, about sixty years old, who
seemed comfortable in his own skin and completely credible. He was
articulate and straightforward. His manner was relaxed. He obviously was
very knowledgeable about computers and software, but he avoided the use
of jargon. His stature was imposing—both tall (about six-foot-four) and
big-boned. Best of all from IBM’s point of view, he didn’t always buy
equipment from IBM. He could make the case that IBM was not a
monopoly and had plenty of competition. That was how Jack had gotten to
know Tom Barr, who had chosen him for this arbitration.
I soon discovered that Jack and I were both from the Midwest, but that
was about all we had in common. He drank bourbon; I drank scotch. He
liked country and western music, and Willie Nelson was his favorite. I
preferred classical music, especially Bruckner symphonies. More important,
Jones had grown up on a small family farm in Iowa, the only child of
Lutheran parents of German ancestry. He had been the first in his family to
go to college—choosing nearby Luther College in Decorah, Iowa, a tiny
church-affiliated school. His big break was a scholarship to MIT, where he
got a master’s degree in electrical engineering with a minor in mathematics.
I had grown up in Kansas City as a rather privileged kid from an
assimilated Jewish background. I spent my high school years in a private
boys’ school and went off to Harvard College without considering it all that
unusual.
Nor did Jack and I share much in way of recreational interests. He loved
to hunt and fish. I didn’t. He asked me if I had ever gone to a pig roast,
grinning at the question: he knew I had not. He had a huge pig-roasting pit
in his backyard, and nothing pleased him more than staying up all nightroasting an entire pig for a party. His home was a huge log house in the
middle of fifteen acres of woods outside Chesapeake, Virginia. Jack had
little interest in foreign travel with one exception: every year he would take
his wife, Nancy, and their entire clan of seven grown children and spouses
to Munich for Oktoberfest. Year after year they would stay at the same
hotel, drink beer in the same beer gardens, and sing the same songs. Much
of this struck me as charming but completely alien. I could not imagine the
Mnookin clan going on an annual pilgrimage to Munich, much less to drink
beer and belt out German drinking songs. I’d never met anyone like Jack
before.
Over the next twelve years Jack and I would become something of an
odd couple, partners who grew very close but couldn’t be more different.
Looking back, I realize that our knowledge and talents were
complementary. I knew a lot about law and process; he knew a lot about
computers. I was talkative and intense; he was laconic and very calm. I was
an academic who fretted over nuances of language and loved to analyze
everything to death; he was an executive who, to my endless admiration,
could make decisions quickly and never look back.
In London, our group interviewed five candidates who looked promising on
paper. Most were prominent English barristers, called Queen’s Counsel,
who were experienced in international arbitration. One candidate, a crusty
old lord and retired judge, disqualified himself within minutes. After
greeting us, he said, “I’ve heard of IBM. But this other company …
Fujitsu? Or is it Jujitsu? What is it?” Another barrister assumed he’d
already been picked and took over the interview. He didn’t make the cut,
either. Nor did the others. None seemed very technologically sophisticated,
and Tom Barr saw several of them as stuffy and pretentious.
This was my first exposure to Barr, who was not a bit stuffy. I discovered
that he, too, was from Kansas City. Rather short and slightly stocky, partial
to elegant suits that might well have been hand-tailored in London, he
exuded supreme self-confidence. At fifty-four, he was at the very pinnacle
of his career.
I had heard all kinds of stories about Barr, whose defense of IBM in the
antitrust cases was legendary. The battle had started in the late 1960s, whenIBM customers and competitors, claiming that IBM was a monopoly,
sought billions of dollars in damages. In 1969, the U.S. government joined
the attack and sought to break it up into several separate companies.


~~~


IBM fought back in a fierce legal campaign that lasted some thirteen
years. (A top IBM executive quipped that during these years the IBM legal
team had no budget, but every year exceeded it.7) Tom Barr was its
commanding general and ultimately triumphed,8 in what one commentator
dubbed “the most brilliant and sustained legal representation in history.”9
Barr had served in the Marines, he was proud of the Corps, and the
experience had shaped his view of litigation as all-out combat. He hated to
lose cases and rarely did. He was once quoted as saying, “I never know
exactly what people mean by the ‘theory of the case.’ My theory of the case
is ‘We’re right and the other guy’s wrong. We’re going to win and the other
guy is going to lose.’ ”10 He demanded total commitment from his troops,
which were famous for working harder, preparing more thoroughly, and
fighting more aggressively than any opponent. In Barr’s office hung a
poster depicting a scowling Marine drill sergeant with veins popping out of
his neck. The caption read, “We Don’t Promise You a Rose Garden.”
I didn’t see this aspect of Barr in London. He and Raven, who already
knew each other on a first-name basis, were very friendly not only to Jack
and me but to each other. They shared an interest in finding a third
arbitrator they could agree on.
Although they found no one to their liking in London, they ultimately
found the man they were looking for in Donald Macdonald, a Toronto
lawyer with extraordinary credentials. He had been a member of the
Canadian Parliament and had held five cabinet posts in the first government
of Pierre Trudeau. When we three arbitrators met for the first time in the
fall of 1985, simply to organize ourselves and establish a schedule, I found
Macdonald equally impressive in person: urbane and polished, as tall as
Jack and as well dressed as Barr. At my suggestion, we made an important
decision about our roles as arbitrators—that all three of us serve strictly as
neutrals.11 Later I would be very glad we had taken this course.
What exactly were these two computer giants fighting about? Boiled down
to its essentials, the fight was about operating system software and othersophisticated software programs, sometimes called “middleware,” which
work in close cooperation with the operating system. Some background is
necessary to see why this was such a big deal for both companies.
An operating system is an organized collection of software used to
manage the flow of work inside the computer and provide services to other
programs. Middleware is software that works closely with the operating
system, using its services and providing specialized services to application
programs. Software applications, such as programs to manage a company’s
payroll, inventory, or customer orders, are written to run “on top of” a
particular operating system and associated middleware programs. Today, for
example, the operating system for PCs is typically some version of
Microsoft Windows. If you own a PC and use Word or Excel, those
applications are written to run “on top of” your Windows operating system.
In 1969, IBM completely dominated the mainframe market, selling about
70 percent of all computers in the world.12 The overwhelming majority of
applications for mainframes were written to run on the IBM operating
system.13
In the early 1970s, the Japanese government aimed to get a piece of the
action for Japanese computer manufacturers, especially in Japan, which was
by then the second-largest computer market in the world. As a matter of
industrial policy, the powerful Ministry of International Trade and Industry
(“MITI”) decided to develop the Japanese computer industry into a force
capable of taking on IBM. It encouraged two companies, Fujitsu and
Hitachi, to manufacture and market “IBM compatible” computers.14 These
machines would be virtually interchangeable with IBM machines, able to
run any application written for an IBM mainframe.
The big question was what to do about the operating system. In
retrospect, Fujitsu could have saved itself a world of trouble if it had simply
let its customers license an operating system from IBM.15 Instead, Fujitsu
made the fateful decision to develop its own operating system, which would
be IBM-compatible and contain special features of its own. At the outset,
Fujitsu may have believed this would not be overly difficult. Throughout
the 1970s, IBM distributed to its customers the source code for the IBM
operating system. With the source code, a programmer could figure out just
how IBM had programmed its software.16 Copyright constraints weren’t anobvious concern back then. (IBM didn’t claim copyright protection for its
software until 1977, and even then no one knew whether copyright law
applied.) But as Takuma Yamamoto would confess in his memoir,
developing a compatible operating system “posed a challenge of far greater
and more severe dimension” than Fujitsu had anticipated17 and would “sow
the seeds of the software dispute destined to be fought farther down the
road with IBM.”18
In the short run, the compatibility strategy appeared to pay off. In 1976,
Fujitsu sold its first IBM-compatible mainframe, the M Series. Six years
later, Fujitsu mainframes were outselling IBM’s in Japan—the first time
any company had outsold IBM in a major market.
But IBM had long suspected that Fujitsu and Hitachi were copying its
technology, and in 1982, it got the goods on each of them.
Hitachi fell first, in a “sting operation” in California that received
worldwide attention. Several Hitachi employees were caught on videotape
trying to buy IBM hardware design manuals. Criminal indictments followed
for the individuals caught in the sting and for the company.19 The scandal
was humiliating for both Hitachi and the Japanese nation: a tremendous loss
of face. A Japanese cabinet official was quoted as saying that Japan had
been “slapped in the face.”20
All this took place against a backdrop of intense economic rivalry
between the United States and Japan. American firms were alarmed because
Japanese firms were undercutting them in the marketplace, often through
industrial espionage. Japanese firms feared that America would adopt
discriminatory trade policies toward Japan. Waves of xenophobia swept
both countries. American commentators claimed the Japanese were
engaging in “sneak attacks.” Shortly after the Hitachi incident, a Japanese
newspaper reported that an anonymous Ameri-can IBM engineer had made
the following boast: “Guess you’ve been reading about what IBM did to
those Japs in California. We sure got them good. It took a little time, but we
made sure they knew who was boss. … [I]n a sense we are at war with
Japan all over again.”21
Later that year, IBM caught up with Fujitsu as well, after acquiring a
Fujitsu mainframe and some of its software. Operating software contains
hundreds of programs, but IBM had to analyze only a few of these toconfirm its worst fears. There was a vast amount of copying. (This was not
a criminal matter, but a potential civil case of copyright infringement.)
The news immediately went to the very top of IBM. The concern was:
How many more programs had Fujitsu copied—and placed in the hands of
its customers? IBM had reviewed only a tiny sample. There was no telling
how far the damage had spread. What was clear was that Fujitsu’s copying
had to be stopped.
The first shot was fired in October 1982, when the president of IBM wrote
directly to the president of Fujitsu to declare that Fujitsu had infringed
IBM’s copyrights. He demanded that Fujitsu pay for these offenses and
clean up its software development process.
Fujitsu parried these claims with equal vigor. First, it said, IBM hadn’t
even bothered to copyright its operating system until 1978, well after
Fujitsu had started selling compatible computers. Second, Japanese
copyright law did not apply to operating system software.22 Third, IBM so
dominated the mainframe market that its operating system had become the
de facto standard; therefore, Fujitsu had every right to develop and maintain
a compatible operating system.
The legal conflict had begun. Eight months of arduous negotiations
ensued.23
On June 29, 1983, the parties signed a pair of documents—the “1983
Agreements”—that attempted to square the circle. But as you already know,
these contracts didn’t solve the problem and in some respects made the
relationship worse. Because they play such a prominent role in our story, I
will explain a bit about them here.
The first document, called the Settlement Agreement, tried to get a grip
on the copying problem. The parties appeared to have three simple goals: to
identify Fujitsu’s “tainted” programs, to compensate IBM for their use, and
to prevent further copying disputes. But because the contract language is
quite complex, some paraphrasing may help nonlawyers understand it. IBM
had the greater bargaining power, so imagine IBM saying the following to
Fujitsu:“Okay, let’s start by making a list of all the programs that arguably
contain copying. You compile the list, because we don’t know how many
programs are affected. Include as many programs as you want—anything
you’re worried we might sue you for. We will sell you immunity for those
programs. We’ll call them ‘Designated Programs’—‘DPs’ for short—a nice
neutral term so you don’t have to admit to copyright violation.
“You will pay us a lump sum of $65 million. In exchange, we promise
not to sue you—or your customers—for having used these programs in the
past.
“As for the future, well, we could make you call up all your customers
and pull the programs off the market, or we could sue your customers who
are using your tainted software. But that would be terribly inconvenient for
them—and you. We understand. So we’ll let you leave the programs in your
customers’ hands, but only on one condition: you pay us a license fee twice
a year, equal to what we charge our customers for the corresponding IBM
program.” (These semiannual fees would soon dwarf the $65 million lump-
sum payment.)
That addressed the first two goals of the Settlement Agreement. The third
related to Fujitsu’s future programming activities and its new programs. To
what extent could Fujitsu use IBM programming ma-terials? And, what use,
if any, could Fujitsu make of its DPs in future programs?
Here’s where things got a little vague. Fujitsu promised to “refrain from
infringing the copyright and other legally protectable rights [of IBM] under
applicable law.” But the scope of these rights was not defined. Fujitsu
promised to adopt an internal protective procedure to make sure its
programmers didn’t have access to IBM programming materials and
wouldn’t do any more copying. But there were important exceptions to this
rule that were poorly defined.24 Fujitsu promised to make copies of all its
new software available in a special depository so that IBM could inspect
them for compliance. But exactly what material it would provide, and
when, weren’t spelled out. What was spelled out was the stiff penalty for
cheating: Fujitsu would have to pay three times the normal license fee and
immediately withdraw the program from its customers.
Moreover, as murky as the Settlement Agreement was, the second
contract was even murkier and would later cause IBM untold grief. Blandlytitled the “Externals Agreement,” it was Fujitsu’s consolation prize—and
gave Fujitsu hope that it might remain compatible as IBM technology
changed. At the time both Fujitsu and IBM made available to their own
customers certain interface information that allowed the customer to write
their own application programs that would work with the operating
system.25 The parties called this “external” information. In this second
agreement, the two companies promised to provide, upon request, the other
with external information in exchange for a license fee.
At the time, IBM may not have thought this Externals Agreement was of
much consequence. IBM had no interest in licensing information pertaining
to Fujitsu’s operating system. But Fujitsu felt this second agreement, and a
license to use IBM interface information, was essential if it was to maintain
IBM compatibility. And it was willing to pay for this information.
But the Externals Agreement didn’t define in any detail what counted as
external information. Nor did the parties even bother to fill out the exhibits,
which should have listed the programs covered by the contract—and the
price.
They were on a collision course of their own making.
It wasn’t long before IBM once again found what it considered flagrant
evidence of copying, and it showed no mercy. IBM demanded that Fujitsu
pay triple fees for all the offending programs and pull them off the market
immediately. Fujitsu couldn’t possibly agree to these terms, which would
have dismantled much of its software base. There were confrontations, even
yelling and screaming.26
Later on, Jack and I would often ask ourselves: How could sophisticated
parties represented by counsel be foolish enough to think that the 1983 deal
could possibly have resolved this conflict? I am now more sympathetic.
With the benefit of hindsight, I think many factors played a role, including
different cultural perceptions of the obligations created by contract.27
For an American company, the details of a contract are critical. In IBM’s
view, the Settlement Agreement created specific obligations that were
legally enforceable. IBM had caught Fujitsu breaking its word, the contract
spelled out the remedies, and IBM was entitled to them. Period!
In Japanese culture, the precise words of a contract are far less important
than the underlying spirit, which should be interpreted with an eye topreserving relationships. For Fujitsu, the purpose of the 1983 Agreements
was to repair a damaged relationship and create a new one in which both
parties would behave reasonably. In Japan, litigation over contracts is rare.
Fujitsu assumed that if new disputes arose, the parties would sit down and
work out their concerns in a reasonable way. Instead, what was IBM doing?
Impugning Fujitsu’s honor and issuing ultimatums. Its behavior was
insulting and its demands humiliating. To meet them would be
economically ruinous.
As the feelings of betrayal mounted, each side viewed the other’s
behavior as increasingly outrageous. Fujitsu belatedly offered to add a slew
of additional programs to the DP list, even ones that IBM hadn’t
complained about. IBM thought this was sneaky and disingenuous. IBM
said, in essence, “Too late! Read the Settlement Agreement! You missed the
deadline. You owe us triple fees for these programs and you have to pull
them off the market.”
IBM’s hard line never softened. In IBM’s view, it was losing both
hardware and software profits because Fujitsu had copied. In June 1985, it
sent Fujitsu a “Final Report” of its alleged offenses, coupled with a
nonnegotiable demand: If Fujitsu didn’t withdraw all offending programs
from the market and pay damages amounting to hundreds of millions of
dollars, IBM would seek to impose these remedies in arbitration.28
As I’ve since learned, President Yamamoto saw the Final Report as a
declaration of war—the final betrayal of the new relationship he had hoped
to create with the 1983 Agreements. Those agreements had been terribly
one-sided, in his view, but Fujitsu had shown its good faith by paying IBM
vast sums of money—more than $150 million in fees since the agreements
were signed. Now IBM was coming back with new demands that threatened
the very survival of his company. Under a Japanese code of honor, you
didn’t negotiate with such an enemy. You said through gritted teeth: “I will
fight you; my son will fight your son; and my grandson will fight your
grandson.”29
Both parties had chosen war. Was this wise? What would Spock have
said? I will return to this question later.The panel decided to hold the first formal arbitration hearing in Palo Alto,
California, conveniently located between Tokyo and New York (it is also
the home of Stanford University). The parties booked a conference room in
a local hotel and made the necessary arrangements. Meanwhile, I hired
Jonathan Greenberg, a former law student of mine, to work half-time with
me on the arbitration as my law clerk. A gifted lawyer (and playwright),
Jonathan would become an indispensable part of the process and later serve
as counsel to the Arbitration Panel.
On the appointed day in February 1986, I met Jack Jones and Don
Macdonald in the hotel lobby, and we entered the conference room
precisely at 9:00 a.m.
I was stunned by what I saw. There were at least a hundred people in the
room, probably more, arranged in two hostile phalanxes like the armies of
Athens and Sparta. In the front row on one side sat Tom Barr, accompanied
by his lieutenants: Cravath partners and Dan Evangelista, soon to be the top
in-house lawyer from IBM.30 Behind them sat their troops: associates and
paralegals wielding huge black litigation briefcases. Behind them glowered
a platoon of IBM executives and managers, each wearing the uniform—
suit, tie, and white shirt—specified by the IBM dress code.
On the other side of the aisle, Raven commanded an army that looked
even bigger than Barr’s. I guessed that Raven had told his clients something
along these lines: “I know from earlier battles that IBM will spare no
expense. They will try to beat you into submission by outspending you.
Your only hope is to demonstrate that you will match them man for man—
that you have the will and resources to fight all the way. Open your
checkbooks. If they put 1,000 men on the battlefield, you should field
1,100.”
Fujitsu had done just that. Among the Japanese troops I recognized
Michio Naruto, the gregarious golfer, and his immediate boss, Shoichi
Ninomiya, a taciturn chain-smoker whom I had also met during my Tokyo
visit. I spotted Yuri Morita, the young man who had served as our translator.
Many of the other Japanese men looked familiar to me because they had
been forced to sit through my lecture on American law.
Every seat in the room was equipped with a headset that could be set to
either Japanese or English. The room teemed with translators. A glass boothat the back of the room had been provided for the simultaneous translators,
whose murmurings would provide a constant babble during the hearing. In
addition, each side had its own translator, and there was one “neutral.” A
court reporter was there to create a transcript in English. Perhaps she
consulted with the neutral. Who knows? A table for the panel had been
placed at the front of the room. I took a seat on Macdonald’s right; Jack sat
on his left.
The hearing lasted about two days and focused mainly on procedural
matters. The Palo Alto weather was miserable. A cold, torrential rain
wrapped us in a gloom worthy of Bleak House, the Dickens novel about the
grotesque inefficiency of the English chancery courts. My most vivid
memory was when the arbitration panel allowed Tom Barr to question
Ninomiya. We all perked up because we thought something interesting was
about to happen. Ninomiya was Fujitsu’s top executive for hardware and
software development and had made many decisions central to the case.
Barr wanted Ninomiya to describe exactly how Fujitsu was currently using
IBM’s programming materials in its software development.

~~~

It should have been a moment of high drama. Barr was a great courtroom
lawyer and no doubt had looked forward to this confrontation. Instead he
found himself moving in slow motion with a stone-faced enemy who
wouldn’t engage. He would ask a question of Ninomiya. It would be
translated from English to Japanese. Ninomiya would then mumble some
short answer in Japanese. One of the translators would translate his
response into English. Another translator would sometimes object to the
first translator’s translation. All three translators would then get into a
dispute while the rest of us sat there impatiently. Barr would then
characterize the answer as unresponsive and ask the same question again,
phrased somewhat differently.
This went on for hours. It was excruciatingly boring. The high point
came as Barr was trying to get Ninomiya to explain how Fujitsu had
decided which programs belonged on the DP list. Barr wanted to force
Ninomiya to acknowledge in front of the panel that the DPs contained
copied material. But Ninomiya parried with a double negative that gave the
translators quite a workout. As I recall, the English version was something
like, “Fujitsu put a program on the DP list when it could not be concluded
that the program had not been influenced by an IBM program.” Even intranslation, it was obvious that Ninomiya had been well coached by
counsel. (Note the words “influenced by” rather than “copied.”) Recently I
learned that one of the young Morrison & Foerster lawyers had nicknamed
him “Garbo” because he was so elusive.

During the next ten months, like a traveling circus, we met in various cities
around the United States, Japan, and even Canada. The parties fought about
everything. For example, the panel needed some education on operating
system software and the technology underlying the conflict, but these
seminars were difficult to arrange because the parties so deeply distrusted
each other and worried we would somehow be brainwashed in this process.
Although our instructors were always neutral experts who weren’t affiliated
with either party, the lawyers fought about who would educate us and they
fretted about what these experts might say. Each side insisted on having a
representative pres-ent at every session so they could carefully monitor
everything we were told.
The parties also submitted an astounding volume of letters, memoranda,
documents, and exhibits to educate us about their conflict. The parties’
submissions also gave us a much clearer sense of the legal questions we
would need to address, although the answers each proposed were
diametrically opposed. Fujitsu argued that it had broad rights to IBM
information under the Externals Agreement, and IBM argued that its
obligations were extremely narrow. IBM argued that copyright law
provided very broad protection for its software, while Fujitsu claimed that
copyright law applied narrowly, if at all, to IBM’s operating system
software.31
Unfortunately, copyright law itself didn’t provide much guidance. For
one thing, it wasn’t clear whether U.S. or Japanese law applied. But either
way, the case posed very difficult questions about the scope of protection.
If copyright law applied to operating system software at all—and we
assumed it did—it obviously prohibited line-by-line copying. IBM’s Final
Report gave some compelling examples of this. (One “smoking gun”
involved a subroutine, or loop, which an IBM programmer had named after
his wife, Lucy. The corresponding Fujitsu program included the very same
loop—also named “Lucy.”) But we didn’t know how important thoseexamples were in the context of the full program. In other instances, IBM
claimed that Fujitsu had simply paraphrased the IBM material. This, too,
would be a violation.
But we had a growing sense that the heart of IBM’s case involved a
much more subtle claim: that Fujitsu had copied the “structure, sequence
and organization” of an IBM program without actually quoting or
paraphrasing any lines of IBM code. When, if ever, would this be enough to
prove the “substantial similarity” required for infringement? Deciding this
issue would require us to apply the most elusive doctrine found in copyright
law, the distinction between “ideas,” which are not protected, and
“expression,” which is.
Even with literary works, it can be hard to draw that line. The following
hypothetical is often used in law school copyright courses: Imagine that the
descendants of William Shakespeare still owned a copyright on his play,
Romeo and Juliet. Would the Broadway musical West Side Story violate the
copyright? The actual words in the two productions are entirely different.
But the story line in West Side Story was plainly copied from Shakespeare’s
play. The plots are similar. (Two families are feuding. Boy from one
feuding family falls in love with girl from the other. They decide to secretly
marry and run off together. After a series of mishaps, all ends tragically
with death of both.) How similar do the two plots have to be before the later
work violates the copyright of the original? Many years ago Learned Hand,
a distinguished federal circuit court judge, said that drawing this line
requires an “ad hoc judgment” based on a careful comparison of the two
works. There’s no rule to tell you how to do it. It all depends on the
particular facts and a detailed comparison of the two works.
And there was the rub. IBM had brought scores of claims against Fujitsu,
each concerning a different software program. To draw the line between
idea and expression, we’d have to conduct a detailed analysis of each
disputed program and its IBM counterpart. How similar would the
sequence, structure, and organization have to be to prove a violation? Each
program contained hundreds of thousands (in some cases millions) of lines
of code. Would we have to examine each program, function by function,
data area by data area, line by line? That would take years.
IBM hoped to limit this process by delivering a knockout blow in the
form of a motion for summary judgment, but to my mind this hope wasnearly delusional. One of the requirements for summary judgment is that no
material facts are in dispute. The idea/expression distinction and most of
Fujitsu’s other defenses clearly involved “mixed questions of law and fact.”
So we denied IBM’s motion32—and its request for triple license fees, which
we held to be punitive—and ruled that we would have to analyze the
disputed Fujitsu programs one at a time, by comparing each with its IBM
corresponding program. We told the parties that a detailed comparison of
the first pair of programs would be due in forty-five days.
The parties immediately began to fight about which pair of programs to
compare first. There were three pairs under consideration. On behalf of
IBM, Barr argued that the panel should start with a pair that he thought
would reveal blatant line-by-line copying. Fujitsu, naturally, wanted to start
with a pair that was deep in the gray area, involving similarities in structure,
sequence, and organization. The third example had features of both.
While the panel was struggling with this issue, Barr suddenly changed
course. “Why choose now, before you’ve seen the evidence?” he asked the
panel. “IBM can submit detailed memoranda on each of the three Fujitsu
programs comparing them to the corresponding IBM program. You can
choose later, after you’ve read our analysis and anything Fujitsu wants to
submit,” he purred. Perhaps, fearing that the panel was about to choose the
wrong set of programs, he wanted to make sure we saw the worst of
Fujitsu’s copying before we made a decision. Whatever his motives, I saw
jaws dropping in horror among his troops. Barr was improvising. He
obviously hadn’t discussed this offer with the enlisted men and women who
would actually be looking at millions of lines of code. From their ashen
faces, I figured some of them wouldn’t be seeing their families for a while.
Meanwhile, I had my own, more basic concern. Was conventional
arbitration a sensible way to resolve this conflict? While we were looking
backward at old disputes, new ones were cropping up. IBM was still
investigating Fujitsu’s alleged misdeeds and adding claims, and Fujitsu was
still developing new programs. I feared the new conflicts would multiply
faster than we could dispose of the old ones. I thought, This is crazy. Like
Sisyphus with his boulder, the panel might never reach the end of its labors.
Moreover, a case-by-case process would miss the forest for the trees.33 Itwouldn’t directly answer the core question: To what extent can Fujitsu use
IBM programming material in the future?
I began to believe that the most effective way to help the parties was to
adopt a radically different approach, one that looked forward as well as
backward. But designing a new process was not part of an arbitrator’s job
description.
I have never been good at hiding my impatience. Even when I’m not
speaking, my facial expressions often give me away. Shortly after the panel
denied summary judgment, we held a session at a beautiful Japanese resort
in Hakone National Park, in the shadow of Mount Fuji. During a break in
the hearing, I decided to take a walk in the woods nearby—and ran into
Tom Barr. I may have made some offhand comment to the effect that we all
had “our work cut out for us.” If I didn’t say it, that certainly was what I
was feeling. Barr may have sensed my frustration with what lay ahead, and
perhaps even shared it.
In any case, he said something that would change the course of the entire
proceeding: “Why don’t you and Jack put your heads together and figure
out some more efficient way to cut through all this crap and get this matter
resolved?”
I was stunned by his directness but leaped at the opportunity. “Do you
mean IBM would be open to some sort of mediation process, with Jack and
me helping the parties see if some kind of deal might be negotiated?”
Barr said, “Yes! I can assure you IBM would participate.”
I found this an appealing prospect. Barr didn’t say why he had not
included Macdonald in his suggestion, but that made sense to me. It would
protect Macdonald, who, after all, had been chosen by both parties. It is
highly unconventional—and some would say improper—for a sitting
arbitrator to change roles and become a mediator. The two roles are
completely different. The former is a decision-maker who imposes a
solution on the parties; the latter is a facilitator who helps the parties
negotiate a solution with each other. If this mediation didn’t work, either
party could probably disqualify Jack or me from returning to an arbitral
role. Leaving Macdonald out of the mediation process was the solution: he
could carry on as arbitrator.I immediately went to find Jack. He liked the idea. The two of us went to
Macdonald and told him about Barr’s suggestion. Macdonald thought the
whole thing was a bit unorthodox and probably doomed to failure, but
worth a try—as long as Fujitsu was willing.
I naïvely thought, Of course Fujitsu will be willing. It’s obviously a great
idea to look for a global solution that doesn’t require comparing scores of
programs! But to my surprise, it wasn’t that easy.
When Jack and I first proposed mediation to the Morrison & Foerster
team, we told them that the idea had initially come from the other side. Bob
Raven and Dave Nelson listened with poker faces and solemnly said they
would consult with their client and get back to us. Eventually Fujitsu agreed
to participate, on one condition: that they not be required to meet or
negotiate directly with IBM. They would participate only if Jack and I met
with both sides separately, gener-ated proposals for the parties, and refined
those ideas through shuttle diplomacy.
As a mediator, this is not my preferred method of mediating. I prefer
working primarily with the parties and their lawyers together, in the same
room. That way, each side hears directly from the other side their story of
what happened in the past and what their needs and future interests are. In
most cases, I believe, this is the best way to solve hard problems and
promote mutual understanding.34
But here, I was forced to realize that was impossible. We had one party
that was very cautious—indeed, fearful that somehow IBM was going to
trick them again. From Fujitsu’s perspective, they had already been burned
once in a negotiation with IBM: the 1983 Agreements had resolved nothing
and IBM had used them to assault Fujitsu. Now here was IBM suggesting
mediation. How could that be good for Fujitsu?
Looking back, I realize that the entire arbitration process must have
seemed terribly alien and risky to Fujitsu. Fujitsu probably resented being
forced to participate in a process so dominated by Americans, and in which
it was so dependent on American lawyers. I recently learned from a Fujitsu
executive that, in the eyes of some of his colleagues, the arbitration was
“four against one”: (1) IBM was an American company; (2) Cravath was anAmerican law firm; (3) the panel consisted entirely of Americans;35 and (4)
Morrison & Foerster was an American law firm.
Nelson and Raven showed great sensitivity to this problem. They were
always at pains to keep their clients fully informed and to strengthen their
sense of control.
One ingenious idea helped improve the quality of communication
between Morrison & Foerster and its clients. Bob Raven suggested to
Fujitsu, “Lend us one of your young in-house lawyers. Have him move to
San Francisco and work out of our San Francisco offices. You have my
word he will be allowed to sit in on all of our internal meetings when we
discuss the strategy we are developing for the arbitration. Your Mr. Katoh
would be perfect.” Masanobu Katoh was fluent in English and served from
then on as a key link between the American lawyers and the Fujitsu top
brass, most of whom were engineers. With a smile, Katoh recently told me
that when he was assigned to the San Francisco post, one of his Fujitsu
colleagues told him he was being sent as a “hostage” to the Americans.36
Cultural differences permeated the mediation process as well. For Jack
and me, there was a big difference between the kinds of conversations we
could have with each side. When we met with the IBM team, lawyers Tom
Barr and Dan Evangelista, IBM’s general counsel, had broad authority to
act on their client’s behalf. They and the IBM executives were comfortable
exploring new ideas with us, telling us what they thought, and even making
decisions on the spot. That was never the case with Fujitsu. Bob Raven and
Dave Nelson attended all the mediation sessions but never claimed
authority to make decisions for their client. Naruto would typically speak
on behalf of Fujitsu but he would usually just report Fujitsu’s reaction to
what had been discussed at the last meeting. He might indicate which
aspects were acceptable and which ones were not.

Once I understood
Fujitsu’s objection, I would invariably suggest some modification and ask
whether this would solve Fujitsu’s problem. The Japanese would typically
say nothing one way or the other. They would be completely nonresponsive.
I was initially very frustrated by this. I wondered, Why can’t they simply
say what they think? Why won’t they work with us?
After one of these sessions, in which the Japanese had once again
declined to respond to one of my “brilliant” ideas, Nelson pulled me asideand gave me a coaching tip. When you are negotiating with a Japanese
company, he said, don’t expect movement at the table when something new
is proposed. The Japanese negotiating team needs time to discuss the idea
within the team and build a new consensus before they can proceed. In a
Japanese organization, no one at the negotiating table typically has the
authority to deviate from the position announced at the outset of a meeting.
“Bob, be patient,” Nelson said. “In due course, after they have discussed it
internally, I suspect they will come around.”
Barr was probably aware of these cultural differences and Raven’s more
limited authority. At one point in the mediation, Jack and I suggested that
the two top lawyers get together and try to work out a couple of details.
They happened to meet on Valentine’s Day, in an IBM conference room that
some staffer had decorated with hearts and valentines. When Barr entered
the room and saw the decorations, he didn’t say “Be My Valentine.” He
quipped, “Remember the St. Valentine’s Day Massacre!” (That was when
Al Capone’s men lined up six members of an opposing gang and shot
them.) Raven laughed. Barr went on to make a concrete proposal to deal
with the questions the panel had asked counsel to work on. Perhaps wanting
to needle Raven, Barr said to him, “Bob, in all seriousness, I want to assure
you that the IBM Corporation has given me full authority to make a deal on
the two questions we’ve been asked to address. What authority has Fujitsu
given you?” Raven, who had a good sense of humor, grinned and said,
“Tom, I want to assure you that I have full authority to report back to
Fujitsu everything you say today.”
What did we actually do during the mediation phase? Ultimately we
designed an entirely new process that was custom-made for this dispute.
Here’s how we got there.
As a first step, Jack and I tackled the mess that was the DP list. This
turned out to be fairly easy because the parties were now both motivated.
We had already dispelled IBM’s fantasy with regard to getting triple
damages for the “new DPs” that Fujitsu had wanted to add. Fujitsu,
meanwhile, still wanted immunity for those programs and was prepared to
pay.After less than four weeks of shuttle diplomacy, we had a deal: Fujitsu
would add 295 programs to the DP list and would pay IBM a lump sum of
$30 million for past use. Going forward, as with the original DPs, it would
pay a semiannual license fee for each customer installation. Thus, in one
fell swoop, the panel and the parties were freed from the task of slogging
through those particular programs case by case.
But that was only a baby step. We had more ambitious goals.
In our meetings with each side, Jack and I had begun asking the sorts of
questions that Spock would ask: What are your company’s interests? Think
about the legitimate interests of the other side. How might we together
develop some creative options that might serve the interests of both sides
better than conventional arbitration?
IBM’s primary interest, clearly, was to protect its intellectual property. To
the extent that Fujitsu used its technology, IBM also had an interest in being
adequately paid for that use.
Fujitsu’s primary interest was to stay in the compatibility business. It
wanted a real shot at being able to develop compatible software through its
independent development efforts.
That much was easy to figure out. But our discussions also suggested to
me that the parties had a common interest in something they hadn’t yet
identified: certainty. Certainty about what materials Fujitsu was entitled to
use in its development of IBM-compatible software. That clarity was what
the 1983 Agreements had failed to provide. I said, “Look, for this conflict
ever to end, we’ve got to have a set of standards. There have got to be more
precise rules. Unless clear standards are established, won’t you be stuck
fighting for all eternity?” I asked each side, “Wouldn’t both companies be
better off if Fujitsu knew in advance what information it can use, rather
than fighting these things out after Fujitsu has released a program to its
customers?”
We were now deep in a Spockian process of thinking things through—
trying to solve a hard problem with all the creativity we could muster. This
was more fun than anything we had done so far. In fact, for me it was
thrilling.
In my mind, the shape of a possible deal gradually emerged, one that
would involve tearing up the old 1983 Agreements and starting fromscratch. With the benefit of hindsight, I saw that these agreements had been
doomed from the start.
One flaw related to the DP list—which had not been a bad idea in theory.
Fujitsu wanted to escape the onerous burden of the continuing semiannual
license fees, and the 1983 Agreement had given it an incentive to “clean
up” its tainted programs by writing successor programs that somehow
didn’t violate IBM’s rights. But without any meeting of the minds about
when a successor was “clean enough” or what part of a DP Fujitsu could
use in some future program, new fights were inevitable.
In actual operation, the DP scheme struck me as incredibly inefficient.
Fujitsu was spending time and money redeveloping old programs to get rid
of the taint. IBM was spending time and money monitoring and tracking
Fujitsu’s successor programs and fighting over whether the new programs
were clean enough. Wouldn’t it make more sense, I thought, to avoid these
disputes by simply allowing Fujitsu to use the DPs any way it wanted in its
future software development—for a price? I suggested to IBM, what you
ought to care about is that Fujitsu pays you adequately for this privilege.
Let’s get rid of the ongoing license fee and establish a lump-sum payment
that allows Fujitsu to use its own DPs freely.
This, too, took some persuasion. IBM was attached to the ongoing
license fees. They liked the income stream. I also sensed that IBM valued
the whole setup as a way to make Fujitsu’s life as miserable as possible. I
said, “Fujitsu has taken this material from your old programs. Sell them a
paid-up license and let them use their DPs anyway they want. Admittedly, a
fair price will need to be established for a paid-up license. You and Fujitsu
will have to negotiate the amount—or the arbitration panel will have to set
it—but that will only happen once. And then you’re done!”
Gradually IBM came around.

~~~


A second flaw in the 1983 Agreements was its total lack of guidance
with regard to the “external information.” IBM was required to pro-vide
some information to Fujitsu, but exactly what was it? At what price? How
would Fujitsu developers get access to that information and only that
information?
This was the most difficult conundrum of all.
The simple solution, Jack and I thought, would be for IBM to write down
the “external information” for each program on a piece of paper and thensell Fujitsu a license to use it. When we asked Fujitsu whether this would be
acceptable, they not only rejected the idea but ridiculed it. They actually
laughed. IBM would have every incentive to leave something out, they
explained—something essential but not obvious. It would be like buying an
expensive kit to build an elaborate model airplane. You would spend weeks
trying to assemble it, only to find that an essential piece was missing and
the plane wouldn’t fly. And you wouldn’t know which piece was missing!
No, Fujitsu would only trust its own people to extract the externals.
IBM in turn found that idea ridiculous. Giving Fujitsu access to IBM
source code would be like opening up the cookie jar to a child with a
ravenous sweet tooth, IBM protested. No matter how strictly the rules were
defined, Fujitsu would take more than they were entitled to.
Jack and I eventually found an answer, but it wasn’t simple. We would
come to call it, somewhat ponderously, the Secured Facility Regime.
First, we decided, we would create a precise definition of external
information. “Instructions” would articulate that definition. Then we would
set up a secure work site managed by an independent expert, in a location
far away from all of Fujitsu’s operations. “Secure” would be an
understatement: the place would be tighter than Fort Knox. A handful of
Fujitsu programmers would work there, isolated and under guard. They
would be permitted to examine IBM programming materials, yes, but
they’d only be allowed to write down (on “survey sheets”) the external
information as it had been defined in the Instructions. That’s all they would
be allowed to do. They would have absolutely no role in writing software
and no contact with their colleagues who did. (I didn’t envy the lonely souls
who would end up working in our airless little capsule.) Before the survey
sheets left the building, they would be vetted by IBM or an independent
expert. If approved, they would be sent to the Fujitsu engineers who were
writing new programs. Needless to say, that second group would have no
access to anything but the survey sheets.
It was an exhausting process to contemplate, but the parties liked the
concept because it offered real security to each.
But how could this scheme become operational? Many details remained
to be filled in. Were the parties prepared to negotiate these issues directly
with each other? Both parties said they’d try, but neither had any confidence
that they would ever reach agreement. Then what?The parties had the 1983 Agreements to fall back on, but that wasn’t a
big comfort. So I made a bold suggestion: Why not give the panel the
power to make any decisions necessary to implement this new regime—but
only to the extent IBM and Fujitsu were unable to agree?
Barr rather quickly responded that IBM would give the panel this
sweeping power. He had only one condition: that going forward, the panel
would consist only of Jack and me. He didn’t say why he didn’t want
Macdonald to be part of the new regime, and I didn’t ask. Barr did say IBM
had a good deal of trust in Jack and me, largely because they knew we
understood their interests.
Fujitsu, however, really struggled with this decision, I later learned.
Certainty sounded good in theory, but ambiguity, after all, has its
advantages. Specificity can be terrifying, especially if it forces you to
accept fewer benefits and tighter restrictions than you think you are entitled
to. Moreover, Fujitsu had been hauled into arbitration unwillingly, and the
idea of giving the panel so much coercive authority was a bitter pill. But
what was the alternative? Fighting things out under the 1983 Agreements?
If they wanted to continue down the compatibility path, they were stuck.
They were going to have conflicts with IBM. The only decision was
whether the Jones-Mnookin regime would be better than conventional
arbitration.
Fujitsu took the leap. Jack and I were willing to serve without
Macdonald, and Macdonald gracefully resigned.37
In February 1987, the parties signed a new accord laying out this
framework. (We called it the “Washington Agreement” because it was
signed in Washington, D.C.) The agreement was only a few pages long and
had taken only four months to create.
We gave the parties sixty days to negotiate the details. As expected, they
failed.
A new hybrid process was about to begin—one in which Jack and I would
each be wearing two hats. We would mediate where possible and rule when
necessary. Over the summer, Jonathan Greenberg and I wrote an Opinion
and Order describing the framework. (Jonathan became counsel to the panel
and would remain closely involved in its work for the next ten years.)In September, Jack and I held our first big press conference and let the
world in on our secret. As you’ve no doubt gathered, we thoroughly
enjoyed our fifteen minutes of fame.
Then the hard work really began.
During the next year, our biggest challenge was to create Instructions
that defined with real precision just what information from IBM programs
Fujitsu would be allowed to extract in the Secured Facility and then later
use in software development.
The judgment calls were tough. Before we could define external
information, we had to grapple with such metaphysical questions as “What
does IBM-compatibility mean?” Or to be more precise, to what extent
should Fujitsu’s operating system legitimately aim to be IBM-compatible?
We soon realized that compatibility was not a point, but a spectrum. Where
did Fujitsu deserve to come out on this spectrum?
I can assure you the two parties fought like crazy over this issue. After
briefs and argument, Jack and I decided that Fujitsu was entitled to a
reasonable opportunity to maintain certain types of compatibility, but not
others.38




There was no way Jack and I could have done this without technical
help. Barr and Raven were equally clueless. To assist us, we assembled
superb technical teams from both companies who did most of the heavy
lifting.
These teams worked surprisingly well together, and we protected them
from the litigators as much as possible. (Some of the lawyers were not
happy to be sidelined and remained a bit dubious about the whole regime.)
The teams were headed by Ron Alepin of Fujitsu and Bill McPhee of IBM,
two software geniuses whom I could occasionally understand, and by
lawyers Tony Clapes (of IBM in-house) and Mike Jacobs of Morrison &
Foerster, who understood programming at a sophisticated level and could
articulate the concepts in a way that could be consistently applied.
In less than a year the Instructions were completed. As you may recall,
the 1983 Externals Agreement had tried to define “external information” in
two sentences. Our Instructions ended up being more than forty single-
spaced pages.39 Through a rule-making process, we also ended up
promulgating hundreds of pages of detailed rules providing strict andelaborate safeguards governing the operation of the Secured Facility, and
ensuring that Fujitsu software programmers outside the facility did not have
access to IBM programming materials.40
Finally, we had to resolve two conflicts over money.
The big issue was the price for the new paid-up license: how much
Fujitsu would pay for the right to use the DPs in its own software
development. Needless to say, the litigators were primed for a fight on this
issue. IBM was asking for more than $2 billion. After receiving preliminary
briefs, we announced the legal standard to be applied and the key variables
we would be estimating in determining an amount.41
Although the financial stakes were high, Jack and I didn’t find the task of
determining the lump-sum payment all that daunting. Indeed, Jack had been
a top executive at a huge railroad and had made lots of big financial
decisions. I found his attitude comforting. “After all,” he told me, “it’s only
money! And both companies have plenty of it.” I agreed. In our view, the
really important work was creating and implementing the new regime so
that both companies could get on with their real business: competing in the
marketplace. Setting a price for the paid-up license was just cleaning up
their old mess.
But that was easy for us to say. Each company assembled vast teams of
lawyers, engineers, and consultants who spent many person-years preparing
massive submissions concerning the variables we had identified as relevant
to the determination of the price for the paid-up license. I’m sure each party
spent millions. At times the strain on the lawyers showed. A few of the
younger lawyers got so caught up in the fight that they started to attack each
other in letters to the panel. Personal insults were flying back and forth.
Jack and I eventually lost patience with this nonsense. We warned them that
if they didn’t cut out the personal attacks, we would impose fines on
individual lawyers. Fortunately, we never had to carry out the threat.
In the end, we found it neither difficult nor time consuming to establish a
fair price for the paid-up license. While some courts might have heard
months of live testimony and argument, we limited the actual hearings to
one week. The only live testimony consisted of the cross-examination of
each party’s experts.42 We gave counsel a chance to make oral arguments,and submit post-hearing briefs. Then we promptly made a decision,43
setting the total price of the paid-up license at $396 million.44
The smaller money issue related to the annual fee that Fujitsu would pay
for the “external information.” (As you will recall, the 1983 Externals
Agreement was useless in this regard—the parties had neglected to set a
price.) After briefs and argument, we decided that for the first year in which
the regime was in operation, Fujitsu would pay between $25 million and
$52 million, depending on how many IBM programs it wanted access to.
This gave Fujitsu an incentive to save money by accessing fewer IBM
programs.
It was then again time to go public, with another carefully orchestrated
round of press conferences both in New York and Tokyo. In our first round,
Jack and I had simply sketched out a framework. Now we had put meat on
the bones and we wanted people to see what we and the parties had created.
We released an opinion, prepared with Jonathan Greenberg’s able
assistance, explaining the details, including the Instructions and the dollar
amounts Fujitsu would be required to pay.
Again, there were hundreds of newspaper articles around the world, most
very laudatory. As the Wall Street Journal reported, some observers hailed
what we had done as “a model for resolving arcane, high-tech lawsuits.”
But others considered our role controversial. A Dean Witter analyst
harrumphed, “This is a warning to other large companies: don’t throw your
fate in the hands of an arbitrator. You never know what they’ll do, and
they’ll order you not to say anything about it. They are above the lawyers
and above the courts.”45 Ah, those were the days!
In May 1989, the final piece fell into place: the Secured Facility was up and
running. Of course, its location was a carefully guarded secret. In our rather
quiet announcement of this milestone, we just said it was in Japan.
No expense was spared in creating this hermetically sealed chamber. If
we and the parties could have put it on the moon, we would have. Instead
we located it in Sakura, an obscure town about forty miles outside Tokyo,
on the top two floors of an eight-story office building. Inside the building’s
sole elevator, you would never know that floors seven and eight even
existed. We had the buttons and numbers for those floors removed from theelevator panel. You could only gain access to these floors with an elevator
key, and only the facility manager and the guards had them. No one else
reached the seventh or eighth floor unless their names were on a list, and
even then they had to be personally escorted. There were guards on both
floors twenty-four hours a day, 365 days a year. As far as we knew, no one
in Sakura—or even the building—ever knew what was going on in there.
The handful of Fujitsu programmers who worked in the facility were not
permitted to bring anything in or out of the inner sanctum—not a cell
phone, not a wallet, not a scrap of paper. (Personal items had to be checked
in a locker.) They had no access to a phone. Every time they went in or out,
their movements were documented. The IBM source code was kept in a
locked safe. We used security consultants to design the system, of course,
and before the facility opened we hired a different security expert, whose
primary client was the CIA, to check things out. He said our facility was
more secure than either the Pentagon or the CIA headquarters in Langley,
Virginia.
For the next seven years the regime operated without a hitch. As an extra
safeguard, IBM built its own secured facility in Hampton, New Hampshire,
to inspect Fujitsu’s new programs. IBM had the right to bring a claim
before the panel if it found evidence that Fujitsu was breaking the rules—
and I assure you, IBM looked. But it never brought a claim.
Let me begin my assessment by turning back the clock to June 1985, just
before the arbitration began. Both IBM and Fujitsu were awash in strong
currents of demonization and tribalism. Was it wise for them to give up on
negotiation and go to war? Or did they simply get caught in emotional
traps?
To answer this question, let’s suppose each side had been able to consult
with Spock and consider his advice dispassionately. In 1985, could they
have resolved their conflict through negotiation? What could they have
done differently?
With regard to IBM, Spock would have pressed them on whether their
hardball strategy in 1984 was wise. As you recall, Fujitsu offered to add
many programs to the DP list in 1984, plainly signaling that it was prepared
to negotiate a deal in which it would buy immunity for these programs.IBM refused this offer and demanded a draconian remedy: triple fees and
the withdrawal of the offending software from Fujitsu’s customers. It was
these continued demands—and the threat of arbitration—that triggered the
complete breakdown of negotiations in 1985.
Spock would have asked IBM and its lawyers, “How likely is it that an
arbitration panel would grant you this harsh remedy?” Spock would have
given them slim odds. He would have pointed out that the 1983 Settlement
Agreement was a contract, and contract law does not allow punitive
damages. He would have noted that an arbitration panel probably wouldn’t
order Fujitsu to pull the offending programs off the market because it would
disrupt the business operations of innocent bystanders. In fact, I have a
hunch that the lawyers on both sides of this case made similar assessments
at the time.46
So was it irrational for IBM to persist in these demands? I don’t think so.
In fact, I think IBM would have responded to Spock, “As long as Fujitsu
insists that it has the right to engage in what we see as illegal copying, why
should we give up the leverage of a demand for draconian sanctions?” And
I think Spock would have seen this as rational.
On the Fujitsu side, Spock would surely have focused on its strategic
decision to persist with a business model based on maintaining an IBM-
compatible operating system. Spock would have asked Fujitsu: “There is a
long-term risk that you won’t be able to sustain an IBM-compatible
strategy. Even if you get the ‘external information’ you need, what are the
odds that you can keep producing compatible operating software, given
copyright constraints?” I’m sure Fujitsu asked itself the same question.
Spock would have pushed Fujitsu to consider abandoning that model
altogether, saying: “If you agree to leave the compatibility business after a
reasonable transition period, or agree to sell IBM’s software to your
customers, IBM might be willing to negotiate a reasonable deal with respect
to the other terms.” I’m sure Fujitsu considered this possibility. But in 1985,
my guess is that Fujitsu was not prepared to abandon its compatibility
strategy. It had no ready alternative. Whatever the long-term risks of that
strategy, I strongly suspect that Fujitsu perceived that abandoning it was
even riskier. And I don’t think Spock could have characterized this
conclusion as irrational.That leaves us with an interesting question. With the benefit of hindsight,
we know there was a solution to this conflict: the Secured Facility Regime,
which the panel and the parties devised jointly. Could the parties have
figured this out on their own—two years earlier—and avoided warfare
altogether?
To put it another way, suppose either side had offered the other a deal
identical to the one we later imposed: the same lump-sum amount for the
paid-up license; the same Instructions; the same annual access fee; the same
Secured Facility safeguards. In 1985, would either have accepted such a
deal from their adversary?
I think the answer is no—it’s inconceivable. And more important, I don’t
think Spock would have considered either party’s refusal to be irrational or
unwise, even though, with the benefit of hindsight, both would have been
better off with the Secured Facility Regime.
Why is this so? Why couldn’t they have saved themselves all that pain?
The answer, I think, lies in the nature of uncertainty and its role in
decision-making. This conflict was full of uncertainty on both sides. The
legal issues were so unclear that the parties’ lawyers could reasonably make
very different predictions of what an arbitration panel would decide. The
parties were fierce competitors and didn’t trust each other, with good
reason. Moreover, I suspect that within each company there were powerful
constituencies that would have opposed the radical concessions necessary to
create the Secured Facility.
Therefore, I am sure that IBM would never have agreed to give Fujitsu
access to its source code, no matter what the safeguards. IBM would have
said, “Are you crazy? Fujitsu is a major competitor. The 1983 Agreements
don’t give them the right to inspect our source code, and they’ll never get it
in arbitration. So why should we give it to them now? No way!”47
Similarly, I can’t imagine Fujitsu accepting a deal as restrictive as the
one we eventually imposed. The elaborate safeguards contained in the
Security Facility Regime were highly intrusive of Fujitsu’s programming
practices. And we gave Fujitsu far less access to “external information”
than its lawyers might reasonably have expected.
In short, both sides would probably have said, “No thanks. We’ll do
better in arbitration.” And they wouldn’t have been crazy to think so. Nordo I think they realized in 1985 how poorly suited arbitration was for their
type of dispute. Even if they had been capable of such foresight and had
seen that the Secured Facility Regime served their interests better than
warfare, I don’t think they could have made the mental leaps necessary to
erect such a structure, absent the panel’s coercive power.
This conclusion has implications that extend well beyond this unique
case. In some conflicts, the intervention of third parties with coercive power
may be necessary to overcome a host of barriers: not only distorted thinking
created by psychological or ideological traps, but uncertainty and internal
organizational constraints.
Moreover, the type of coercive process used, and when, can make a real
difference.

~~~

A conventional lawsuit, for example, would have been a disaster in this
case. The parties were right to avoid it. Can you imagine a jury trying to
deal with the technological and copyright issues involved? Or even a judge,
for that matter? Moreover, I doubt the parties could have agreed on venue.
Fujitsu would have refused to try this case in an American court and IBM
would have refused to try it in Japan. So arbitration had its advantages,
including the fact that the parties could choose the decision-makers.
Once the parties were in conventional arbitration, the panel’s rulings in
response to the motions for summary judgment could not appropriately
resolve the core copyright issue, but they did remove one of IBM’s favorite
cudgels, the threat of draconian penalties—nudging the parties closer to
settlement.
Although many disputants do settle after summary judgment, these
parties didn’t. As you recall, they tried and failed. They needed a third way.
What ultimately worked was a hybrid process that started out as a
conventional arbitration and evolved into something more complex—a kind
of “grab bag” in which Jack and I were free to play many different roles,
depending on the conflicts that arose over time. Our mind-set was
facilitative: We were always eager to help the parties reach agreement,
directly or indirectly, through their own negotiations. We always had in
mind that the parties knew far more than we ever could about the
technology and their own priorities and constraints. We always wanted to
build on what they and their lawyers knew about the problem. But we hadmuscle in reserve. Without the flexibility of this hybrid system, we never
would have resolved this case.
For example, in setting the price for the paid-up license, we used a
process similar to traditional arbitration. (Indeed, it was not that different
from what a court might have done, although I think it was quicker.) In
creating the Instructions, we employed something akin to an administrative
rule-making process. Once the regime was up and running, we acted like a
regulatory commission charged with ensuring compliance. Imagine trying
to mediate those issues! It would have been a nightmare. But because the
parties had given us the power to use clout when necessary, they were able
to capture the efficiencies of a coercive process without losing the tailor-
made nature of the system itself.
Another lesson of this case is that a third party, acting as mediator, can
facilitate voluntary settlements when it is impossible for bitter enemies even
to sit down at the negotiation table together. You will recall that during the
initial mediation phase of our process, Fujitsu refused to negotiate directly
with IBM. But as go-betweens, Jack and I helped the parties make a deal in
which Fujitsu added hundreds of programs to the DP list.
Why should it matter whether negotiations are direct or indirect?
Because for a party locked in a heated conflict, direct negotiations may be
perceived as imposing greater risks and offering fewer benefits. Any
proposal coming directly from the enemy may be devalued,48 and the mere
act of sitting down at the negotiating table with a distrusted adversary may
subject the leader to intense criticism from hard-liners. Indirect negotiations
may feel much safer, both psychologically and politically. International
relations provides many examples of intermediaries permitting indirect
negotiations where adversaries are not willing to meet together. Switzerland
acted as a go-between for the United States and Iran in 2003, and Turkey
played a similar role for Syria and Israel in 2008.
Our mediation process provided Fujitsu’s leaders with analogous
protective cover. Fujitsu decision-makers could tell themselves—and their
constituents—that they weren’t bargaining with the Devil. Instead, they
were working with Jones and Mnookin to explore any options we might
suggest.When mediation didn’t work, Jack and I found that our ability to impose
an outcome also lifted strategic and emotional burdens. It relieved one side
or the other from agreeing to a compromise that might have been politically
unacceptable behind the table. “I was made to do it by the panel” was a
refrain that provided some psychological comfort and organizational
protection.
This combination of roles—sometimes called “med-arb” because it
combines the functions of both mediation and arbitration—is not only
unusual but typically frowned upon.49 There are two concerns. One is that a
mediator who also has coercive powers won’t really mediate at all—instead
he or she will simply twist arms under the guise of being facilitative. The
parties won’t get the full benefit of a facilitative approach. The second
concern is that the neutral will learn things during a private mediation
session that may later corrupt his judgment as an arbitrator.
Both of these concerns are legitimate, but I think that sophisticated and
informed disputants should have the option of choosing a mixed process in
which the same person plays multiple roles. This can have obvious
efficiencies. The information that Jack and I gained at each stage of the
process was never wasted. Moreover, parties may grow to trust particular
neutrals and want them to play a mixed role.
This hybrid process turned out to be congruent with the Japanese cultural
tradition captured by the word gaiatsu, or “outside pressure or guidance.”
As neutrals, Jack and I adopted what we hoped would be a flexible,
problem-solving mantra backed up by arbitral authority. In some ways such
a mantra is consistent with the Japanese historical preference for informal
dispute resolution mechanisms, based on well-developed relationships.
This case teaches a lesson about the role of lawyers as well. Lawyers can
do more than conduct litigation as usual. The lawyers in this case played
very constructive roles in designing a dispute system and getting this
conflict resolved. Without the leadership and support of Raven and Barr, the
clients would never have agreed to this process.
In 1997, five years before our regime was scheduled to end, the parties
jointly decided that it was no longer necessary. Jack and I weren’t surprised.
Fujitsu had not requested access to new IBM source code for about threeyears. We sensed that Fujitsu had been winding down its IBM-compatible
line of business and was focusing its energies elsewhere. Indeed, our regime
had given Fujitsu time to make an orderly transition to a new business
model that was not based on IBM compatibility. As always, the computer
world was changing. Mainframes, while still important, were no longer the
center of the computer universe.
The parties made their final public announcement: Their conflict was
officially over, and the special regime had ended. The two com-panies
jointly declared their return to “an ordinary business relationship” governed
by ordinary law. But sometimes an ordinary thing can knock your socks off,
or at least give you pause. Imagine Palestinians and Israelis announcing that
they had established ordinary relations in Jerusalem.