Nature abhors a vacuum. In order to promote life, Mother Nature
attempts to find balance whenever possible. When life is destroyed
because of a forest fire, for example, nature will introduce new life to
replace it. The existence of a food chain in any ecosystem, in which
each animal exists as food for another, is a way of maintaining
balance. The Golden Circle, grounded in natural principles of
biology, obeys the need for balance as well. As I've discussed, when
the WHY is absent, imbalance is produced and manipulations
thrive. And when manipulations thrive, uncertainty increases for
buyers, instability increases for sellers and stress increases for all.
Starting with WHY is just the beginning. There is still work to be
done before a person or an organization earns the right or ability to
inspire. For The Golden Circle to work, each of the pieces must be in
balance and in the right order.
Clarity of WHY
It all starts with clarity. You have to know WHY you do WHAT you
do. If people don't buy WHAT you do, they buy WHY you do it, so
it follows that if you don't know WHY you do WHAT you do, how
will anyone else? If the leader of the organization can't clearly ar-
ticulate WHY the organization exists in terms beyond its products
or services, then how does he expect the employees to know WHY
to come to work? If a politician can't articulate WHY she seeks
71START WITH WHY
public office beyond the standard "to serve the people" (the mini-
mum rational standard for all politicians), then how will the voters
know whom to follow? Manipulations can motivate the outcome of
an election, but they don't help choose who should lead. To lead
requires those who willingly follow. It requires those who believe in
something bigger than a single issue. To inspire starts with the
clarity of WHY.
Discipline of HOW
Once you know WHY you do what you do, the question is HOW
will you do it? HOWs are your values or principles that guide HOW
to bring your cause to life. HOW we do things manifests in the
systems and processes within an organization and the culture. Un-
derstanding HOW you do things and, more importantly, having the
discipline to hold the organization and all its employees accountable
to those guiding principles enhances an organization's ability to
work to its natural strengths. Understanding HOW gives greater
ability, for example, to hire people or find partners who will
naturally thrive when working with you.
Ironically, the most important question with the most elusive
answer—WHY do you do what you do?—is actually quite simple
and efficient to discover (and I'll share it in later chapters). It's the
discipline to never veer from your cause, to hold yourself
accountable to HOW you do things; that's the hardest part. Making
it even more difficult for ourselves, we remind ourselves of our
values by writing them on the wall... as nouns. Integrity. Honesty.
Innovation. Communication, for example. But nouns are not
actionable. They are things. You can't build systems or develop
incentives around those things. It's nearly impossible to hold people
accountable to nouns.
72CLARITY, DISCIPLINE AND CONSISTENCY
"A little more innovation today if you would please, Bob." And if
you have to write "honesty" on your wall to remind you to do it,
then you probably have bigger problems anyway.
For values or guiding principles to be truly effective they have to
be verbs. It's not "integrity," it's "always do the right thing." It's not
"innovation," it's "look at the problem from a different angle."
Articulating our values as verbs gives us a clear idea ... we have a
clear idea of how to act in any situation. We can hold each other
accountable to them measure them or even build incentives around
them. Telling people to have integrity doesn't guarantee that their
decisions will always keep customers' or clients' best interest in
mind; telling them to always do the right thing does. I wonder what
values Samsung had written on the wall when they developed that
rebate that wasn't applicable to people living in apartment
buildings.
The Golden Circle offers an explanation for long-term success,
but the inherent nature of doing things for the long term often
includes investments or short-term costs. This is the reason the
discipline to stay focused on the WHY and remain true to your
values matters so much.
Consistency of WHAT
Everything you say and everything you do has to prove what
you believe. A WHY is just a belief. That's all it is. HOWs are the
actions you take to realize that belief. And WHATs are the results of
those actions—everything you say and do: your products, services,
marketing, PR, culture and whom you hire. If people don't buy
WHAT you do but WHY you do it, then all these things must be
consistent. With consistency people will see and hear, without a
shadow of a doubt, what you believe. After all, we live in a tangible
world. The only way people will know what you believe is by the
73START WITH WHY
things you say and do, and if you're not consistent in the things you
say and do, no one will know what you believe.
It is at the WHAT level that authenticity happens. "Authenticity"
is that word so often bandied about in the corporate and political
worlds. Everyone talks about the importance of being authentic.
"You must be authentic," experts say. "All the trend data shows that
people prefer to do business with authentic brands." "People vote for
the authentic candidate." The problem is, that instruction is totally
unactionable.
How do you go into somebody's office and say, "From now on,
please, a little more authenticity." "That marketing piece you're
working on," a CEO might instruct, "please make it a little more
authentic." What do companies do to make their marketing or their
sales or whatever they're doing authentic?
The common solution is hilarious to me. They go out and do
customer research and they ask the customers, what would we have
to tell you for us to be authentic? This entirely misses the point. You
can't ask others what you have to do to be authentic. Being authentic
means that you already know. What does a politician say when told
to be "more authentic"? How does a leader act more "authentically"?
Without a clear understanding of WHY, the instruction is
completely useless.
What authenticity means is that your Golden Circle is in balance.
It means that everything you say and everything you do you actually
believe. This goes for management as well as the employees. Only
when that happens can the things you say and do be viewed as
authentic. Apple believed that its original Apple computer and its
Macintosh challenged the dominant IBM DOS platforms. Apple
believes its iPod and iTunes products are challenging the status quo
in the music industry. And we all understand WHY Apple does
what it does. It is because of that mutual understanding that we
view those Apple products as authentic. Dell introduced mp3
74CLARITY, DISCIPLINE AND CONSISTENCY
players and PDAs in an attempt to enter the small electronics
business. We don't know what Dell's WHY is, we have no certainty
about what the company believes or WHY it produced those prod-
ucts beyond self-gain and a desire to capitalize on a new market
segment. Those products are not authentic. It's not that Dell couldn't
enter other markets—it certainly has the knowledge and ability to
make good products—but its ability to do so without a clear
understanding of WHY is what makes it much harder and much
more expensive. Just producing high-quality products and
marketing them does not guarantee success. Authenticity cannot be
achieved without clarity of WHY. And authenticity matters.
Ask the best salesmen what it takes to be a great salesman. They
will always tell you that it helps when you really believe in the
product you're selling. What does belief have to do with a sales job?
Simple. When salesmen actually believe in the thing they are selling,
then the words that come out of their mouths are authentic. When
belief enters the equation, passion exudes from the salesman. It is
this authenticity that produces the relationships upon which all the
best sales organizations are based. Relationships also build trust.
And with trust comes loyalty. Absent a balanced Golden Circle
means no authenticity, which means no strong relationships, which
means no trust. And you're back at square one selling on price,
service, quality or features. You are back to being like everyone else.
Worse, without that authenticity, companies resort to manipulation:
pricing, promotions, peer pressure, fear, take your pick. Effective?
Of course, but only for the short term.
Being authentic is not a requirement for success, but it is if you
want that success to be a lasting success. Again, it goes back to
WHY. Authenticity is when you say and do the things you actually
believe. But if you don't know WHY the organization or the
products exist on a level beyond WHAT you do, then it is
impossible to know if the things you say or do are consistent with
75START WITH WHY
your WHY. Without WHY, any attempt at authenticity will almost
always be inauthentic.
The Right Order
After you have clarity of WHY, are disciplined and accountable
to your own values and guiding principles, and are consistent in all
you say and do, the final step is to keep it all in the right order. Just
like that little Apple marketing example I used earlier, simply
changing the order of the information, starting with WHY, changed
the impact of the message. The WHATs are important—they pro-
vide the tangible proof of the WHY—but WHY must come first. The
WHY provides the context for everything else. As you will see over
and over in all the cases and examples in this book, whether in
leadership, decision-making or communication, starting with WHY
has a profound and long-lasting impact on the result. Starting with
WHY is what inspires people to act.
If You Don't Know WHY, You Can't Know HOW
Rollin King, a San Antonio businessman, hatched the idea to take
what Pacific Southwest was doing in California and bring it to
Texas—to start an airline that flew short-haul flights between Dallas,
Houston and San Antonio. He had recently gone through a long and
messy divorce and turned to the one man he trusted to help him get
his idea off the ground. His Wild Turkey-drinking, chain-smoking
divorce lawyer, Herb Kelleher.
In nearly every way, King and Kelleher were opposites. King, a
numbers guy, was notoriously gruff and awkward, while Kelleher
was gregarious and likable. At first Kelleher called King's idea a
dumb one, but by the end of the evening King had successfully
inspired him with his vision and Kelleher agreed to consider coming
on board. It would take four years, however, before Southwest
76CLARITY, DISCIPLINE AND CONSISTENCY
Airlines would make its first flight from Dallas's Love Field to
Houston.
Southwest did not invent the concept of a low-cost airline. Pacific
Southwest Airlines pioneered the industry—Southwest even copied
their name. Southwest had no first mover's advantage—Braniff In-
ternational Airways, Texas International Airlines and Continental
Airlines were already serving the Texas market, and none was eager
to give up any ground. But Southwest was not built to be an airline.
It was built to champion a cause. They just happened to use an air-
line to do it.
In the early 1970s, only 15 percent of the traveling population
traveled by air. At that rate, the market was small enough to scare
off most would-be competitors to the big airlines. But Southwest
wasn't interested in competing against everyone else for 15 percent
of the traveling population. Southwest cared about the other 85
percent. Back then, if you asked Southwest whom their competition
was, they would have told you, "We compete against the car and the
bus." But what they meant was, "We're the champion for the
common man." That was WHY they started the airline. That was
their cause, their purpose, their reason for existing. HOW they went
about building their company was not a strategy developed by a
high-priced management consultancy. It wasn't a collection of best
practices that they saw other companies doing. Their guiding
principles and values stemmed directly from their WHY and were
more common sense than anything else.
In the 1970s, air travel was expensive, and if Southwest was
going to be the champion for the common man, they had to be
cheap. It was an imperative. And in a day and age when air travel
was elitist—back then people wore ties on planes—as the champion
for the common man, Southwest had to be fun. It was an imperative.
In a time when air travel was complicated, with different prices
depending on when you booked, Southwest had to be simple. If
77START WITH WHY
they were to be accessible to the other 85 percent, then simplicity
was an imperative. At the time, Southwest had two price categories:
nights/weekends and daytime. That was it.
Cheap, fun and simple. That's HOW they did it. That's how they
were to champion the cause of the common man. The result of their
actions was made tangible in the things they said and did— their
product, the people they hired, their culture and their marketing.
"You are now free to move about the country," they said in their
advertising. That's much more than a tagline. That's a cause. And
it's a cause looking for followers. Those who could relate to
Southwest, those who saw themselves as average Joes, now had an
alternative to the big airlines. And those who believed what South-
west believed became fiercely loyal to the company. They felt
Southwest was a company that spoke directly to them and directly
for them. More importantly, they felt that flying Southwest said
something about who they were as people. The loyalty that devel-
oped with their customers had nothing to do with price. Price was
simply one of the ways the airline brought their cause to life.
Howard Putnam, one of the former presidents of Southwest,
likes to tell a story of a senior executive of a large company who
approached him after an event. The executive said he always flew
one of the big airlines when he traveled on business. He had to, it
was a company mandate. And although he had accumulated many
frequent flier miles on the other airline and money was no object,
when he flew for himself or with his family, he always flew South-
west. "He loves Southwest," Putnam says with a grin when he tells
the story. Just because Southwest is cheap doesn't mean it only ap-
peals to those with less money. Cheap is just one of the things
Southwest does that helps us understand what they believe.
What Southwest has achieved is the stuff of business folklore. As
a result of WHY they do what they do, and because they are highly
disciplined in HOW they do it, they are the most profitable airline
78CLARITY, DISCIPLINE AND CONSISTENCY
in history. There has never been a year that they didn't turn a profit,
including after September 11 and during the oil crises of the 1970s
and early 2000s. Everything Southwest says and does is authentic.
Everything about them reflects the original cause King and Kelleher
set out to champion decades earlier. It has never veered.
Fast-forward about thirty years. United Airlines and Delta Air-
lines looked at the success of Southwest and decided they needed a
low-cost product to compete and share in Southwest's success. "We
got to get us one of those," they thought. In April 2003, Delta
launched their low-cost alternative, Song. Less than a year later
United launched Ted. In both cases, they copied HOW Southwest
did it. They made Ted and Song cheap, fun and simple. And for
anyone who ever flew Ted or Song, they were cheap, they were fun
and they were simple. But both failed.
United and Delta were both old hands in the airline business and
were every bit qualified to add whatever products they wanted to
adapt to market conditions or seize opportunities. The problem was
not with WHAT they did, the problem was, no one knew WHY
Song or Ted existed. They may have even been better than South-
west. But it didn't matter. Sure, people flew them, but there are
always reasons people do business with you that have nothing to do
with you. That people can be motivated to use your product is not
the issue; the problem was that too few were loyal to the brands.
Without a sense of WHY, Song and Ted were just another couple of
airlines. Without a clear sense of WHY, all that people had to judge
them on was price or convenience. They were commodities that had
to rely on manipulations to build their businesses, an expensive
proposition. United abandoned its entry into the low-cost airline
business just four years after it began, and Delta's Song also took its
last flight only four years after it launched.
It is a false assumption that differentiation happens in HOW and
WHAT you do. Simply offering a high-quality product with more
79START WITH WHY
features or better service or a better price does not create difference.
Doing so guarantees no success. Differentiation happens in WHY
and HOW you do it. Southwest isn't the best airline in the world.
Nor are they always the cheapest. They have fewer routes than
many of their competition and don't even fly outside the continental
United States. WHAT they do is not always significantly better. But
WHY they do it is crystal clear and everything they do proves it.
There are many ways to motivate people to do things, but loyalty
comes from the ability to inspire people. Only when the WHY is
clear and when people believe what you believe can a true loyal
relationship develop.
Manipulation and Inspiration Are Similar, but Not the Same
Manipulation and inspiration both tickle the limbic brain.
Aspirational messages, fear or peer pressure all push us to decide
one way or another by appealing to our irrational desires or playing
on our fears. But it's when that emotional feeling goes deeper than
insecurity or uncertainty or dreams that the emotional reaction
aligns with how we view ourselves. It is at that point that behavior
moves from being motivated to inspired. When we are inspired, the
decisions we make have more to do with who we are and less to do
with the companies or the products we're buying.
When our decisions feel right, we're willing to pay a premium or
suffer an inconvenience for those products or services. This has
nothing to do with price or quality. Price, quality, features and ser-
vice are important, but they are the cost of entry in business today. It
is those visceral limbic feelings that create loyalty. And it is that
loyalty that gives Apple or Harley-Davidson or Southwest Airlines
or Martin Luther King or any other great leader who commands a
following such a huge advantage. Without a strong base of loyal
followers, the pressure increases to manipulate—to compete or
80CLARITY, DISCIPLINE AND CONSISTENCY
"differentiate" based on price, quality, service or features. Loyalty,
real emotional value, exists in the brain of the buyer, not the seller.
It's hard to make a case to someone that your products or ser-
vices are important in their lives based on external rational factors
that you have defined as valuable (remember the Ferrari versus the
Honda). However, if your WHYs and their WHY correspond, then
they will see your products and services as tangible ways to prove
what they believe. When WHY, HOW, and WHAT are in balance,
authenticity is achieved and the buyer feels fulfilled. When they are
out of balance, stress or uncertainty exists. When that happens, the
decisions we make will also be out of balance. Without WHY, the
buyer is easily motivated by aspiration or fear. At that point, it is the
buyer who is at the greatest risk of ending up being inauthentic. If
they buy something that doesn't clearly embody their own sense of
WHY, then those around them have little evidence to paint a clear
and accurate picture of who they are.
The human animal is a social animal. We're very good at sensing
subtleties in behavior and judging people accordingly. We get good
feelings and bad feelings about companies, just as we get good
feelings and bad feelings about people. There are some people we
just feel we can trust and others we just feel we can't. Those feelings
also manifest when organizations try to court us. Our ability to feel
one way or another toward a person or an organization is the same.
What changes is who is talking to us, but it is always a single indi-
vidual who is listening. Even when a company airs its message on
TV, for example, no matter how many people see the commercial, it
is always and only an individual that can receive the message. This
is the value of The Golden Circle; it provides a way to communicate
consistent with how individuals receive information. For this reason
an organization must be clear about its purpose, cause or belief and
make sure that everything they say and do is consistent with and
authentic to that belief. If the levels of The Golden Circle are in
81START WITH WHY
balance, all those who share the organization's view of the world
will be drawn to it and its products like a moth to a light bulb.
Doing Business Is Like Dating
I'd like to introduce you to our imaginary friend Brad. Brad is
going on a date tonight. It's a first date and he's pretty excited. He
thinks the woman he's about to meet is really beautiful and that she
makes a great prospect. Brad sits down for dinner and he starts
talking.
"I am extremely rich."
"I have a big house and I drive a beautiful car."
"I know lots of famous people."
"I'm on TV all the time, which is good because I'm good-
looking."
"I've actually done pretty well for myself."
The question is, does Brad get a second date?
The way we communicate and the way we behave is all a matter of
biology. That means we can make some comparisons between the
things we do in our social lives and the things we do in our
professional lives. After all, people are people. To learn how to
apply. WHY to a business situation, you needn't look much farther
than how we act on a date. Because, in reality, there is no difference
between sales and dating. In both circumstances, you sit across a
table from someone and hope to say enough of the right things to
close the deal. Of course, you could always opt for a manipulation
or two, a fancy dinner, dropping hints of tickets that you have or
whom you know. Depending on how badly you want to close the
deal, you could tell them anything they want to hear. Promise them
the world and the odds are good that you will close the deal. Once.
82CLARITY, DISCIPLINE AND CONSISTENCY
Maybe twice. With time, however, maintaining that relationship
will cost more and more. No matter the manipulations you choose,
this is not the way to build a trusting relationship.
In Brad's case, it is obvious that the date did not go well. The
odds are not good that he will get a second date, and he's certainly
not done a good job of laying down the foundation to build a rela-
tionship. Ironically, the woman's initial interest may have been gen-
erated based on those elements. She agreed to go on the date
because her friends told her that Brad was good-looking and that he
had a good job and that he knew a lot of famous people. Even
though all those things may be true, WHATs don't drive decision-
making, WHATs should be used as proof of WHY, and the date
plainly fell flat.
Let's send Brad out again, but this time he's going to start with
WHY.
"You know what I love about my life?" he starts this time. "I get
to wake up every day to do something I love. I get to inspire people
to do the things that inspire them. It's the most wonderful thing in
the world. In fact, the best part is trying to figure out all the dif-
ferent ways I can do that. It really is amazing. And believe it or not,
I've actually been able to make a lot of money from it. I bought a big
house and a nice car. I get to meet lots of famous people and I get to
be on TV all the time, which is fun, because I'm good- looking. I'm
very lucky that I'm doing something that I love, I've actually been
able to do pretty well because of it."
This time the chances Brad will get a second date, assuming that
whoever is sitting across from him believes what he believes, went
up exponentially. More importantly, he's also laying a good foun-
dation for a relationship, one based on values and beliefs. He said all
the same things as on the first date; the only difference is he started
with WHY, and all the WHATs, all the tangible benefits, served as
proof of that WHY.
83START WITH WHY
Now consider how most companies do business. Someone sits
down across a table from you, they've heard you're a good prospect,
and they start talking.
"Our company is extremely successful."
"We have beautiful offices, you should stop by and check them
out sometime."
"We do business with all the biggest companies and brands."
"I'm sure you've seen our advertising."
"We're actually doing pretty well."
In business, like a bad date, many companies work so hard to
prove their value without saying WHY they exist in the first place.
You'll have to do more than show your resume before someone
finds you appealing, however. But that is exactly what companies
do. They provide you with a long list of their experience—WHAT
they've done, whom they know—all with the idea that you will find
them so desirable that you will have to drop everything to do busi-
ness with them.
People are people and the biology of decision-making is the same
no matter whether it is a personal decision or a business decision.
It's obvious that in the dating scenario it was a bad date, so why
would we expect it to be any different in the business scenario?
Like on a date, it is exceedingly difficult to start building a trusting
relationship with a potential customer or client by trying to
convince them of all the rational features and benefits. Those things
are important, but they serve only to give credibility to a sales pitch
and allow buyers to rationalize their purchase decision. As with all
decisions, people don't buy WHAT you do, they buy WHY you do
it, and WHAT you do serves as the tangible proof of WHY you do it.
But unless you start with WHY, all people have to go on are the
rational benefits. And chances are you won't get a second date.
Here's the alternative:
84CLARITY, DISCIPLINE AND CONSISTENCY
"You know what I love about our company? Every single one of
us comes to work every day to do something we love. We get to
inspire people to do the things that inspire them. It's the most won-
derful thing in the world. In fact, the fun part is trying to figure out
all the different ways we can do that. It really is amazing. The best
part is, it is also good for business. We do really well. We have beau-
tiful offices, you should stop by sometime to see. We work with
some of the biggest companies. I'm sure you've seen our ads. We're
actually doing pretty well."
Now, how certain are you that the second pitch was better than
the first?
Three Degrees of Certainty
When we can only provide a rational basis for a decision, when
we can only point to tangible elements or rational measurements,
the highest level of confidence we can give is, "I think this is the right
decision." That would be biologically accurate because we're
activating the neocortex, the "thinking" part of our brain. At a
neocortical level we can verbalize our thoughts. This is what's hap-
pening when we spend all that time sifting through the pros and
cons, listening to all the differences between plasma or LCD, Dell
versus HP.
When we make gut decisions, the highest level of confidence we
can offer is, "The decision feels right," even if it flies in the face of all
the facts and figures. Again, this is biologically accurate, because gut
decisions happen in the part of the brain that controls our emotions,
not language. Ask the most successful entrepreneurs and leaders
what their secret is and invariably they all say the same thing: "I
trust my gut." The times things went wrong, they will tell you, "I
listened to what others were telling me, even though it didn't feel
right. I should have trusted my gut." It's a good strategy, except it's
not scalable. The gut decision can only be made by a single person.
85START WITH WHY
It's a perfectly good strategy for an individual or a small
organization, but what happens when success necessitates that more
people be able to make decisions that feel right?
That's when the power of WHY can be fully realized. The ability
to put a WHY into words provides the emotional context for deci-
sions. It offers greater confidence than "I think it's right." It's more
scalable than "I feel it's right." When you know your WHY, the
highest level of confidence you can offer is, "I know it's right." When
you know the decision is right, not only does it feel right, but you can
also rationalize it and easily put it into words. The decision is fully
balanced. The rational WHATs offer proof for the feeling of WHY. If
you can verbalize the feeling that drove the gut decision, if you can
clearly state your WHY, you'll provide a clear context for those
around you to understand why that decision was made. If the
decision is consistent with the facts and figures, then those facts and
figures serve to reinforce the decision—this is balance. And if the
decision flies in the face of all the facts and figures then it will
highlight the other factors that need to be considered. It can turn a
controversial decision from a debate into a discussion.
My former business partner, for example, would get upset when
I turned away business. I would tell him that a potential client didn't
"feel" right. That would frustrate him to no end because "the client's
money was as good as everyone else's," he would tell me. He
couldn't understand the reason for my decision and, worse, I
couldn't explain it. It was just a feeling I had. In contrast, these days
I can easily explain WHY I'm in business—to inspire people to do
the things that inspire them. If I were to make the same decision
now for the same gut reason, there is no debate because everyone is
clear WHY the decision was made. We turn away business because
those potential clients don't believe what we believe and they are not
interested in anything to do with inspiring people. With a clear
sense of WHY, a debate to take on a bad-fit client turns into a
86CLARITY, DISCIPLINE AND CONSISTENCY
discussion of whether the imbalance is worth the short-term gain
they may give us.
The goal of business should not be to do business with anyone
who simply wants what you have. It should be to focus on the peo-
ple who believe what you believe. When we are selective about
doing business only with those who believe in our WHY, trust
emerges.